
--- Page 1 ---
American Economic Review 2023, 113(10): 2507–2545 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20201919
2507
The Economic Origins of Government†
By Robert C. Allen, Mattia C. Bertazzini , and Leander Heldring*
We test between cooperative and extractive theories of the origins of 
government. We use river shifts in southern Iraq as a natural exper-
iment, in a new archeological panel dataset. A shift away creates a 
local demand for a government to coordinate because private river 
irrigation needs to be replaced with public canals. It disincentivizes 
local extraction as land is no longer productive without irrigation. 
Consistent with a cooperative theory of government, a river shift 
away led to state formation, canal construction, and the payment 
of tribute. We argue that the first governments coordinated between 
extended households which implemented public good provision. 
(JEL D72, H11, H41, N45, N55, Q15)
The main rationale for government intervention in the economy is the private 
underprovision of public goods and services. When studying such interventions, the 
existence of a government is oftentimes simply assumed. In this paper we examine 
this assumption and test the hypothesis that the demand for such goods and services 
matters for the origin of government as an organization as well. To do so, we com-
bine data on the first states in Iraq with shifting rivers as a source of variation in the 
degree to which individuals stand to gain from government intervention.
Our “demand side” hypothesis builds on a long tradition in the social sciences 
and humanities that studies the formation of governments and states. As in this 
literature, we understand states to consist of several succeeding governments of a 
city or a territory. There are two main clusters of theories. The first views govern-
ment as an organization with a comparative advantage in public good provision 
* Allen: Faculty of Social Science, New York University Abu Dhabi (email: bob.allen@nyu.edu); Bertazzini: 
Department of Economics and Nuffield College, University of Oxford (email: mattia.bertazzini@economics.
ox.ac.uk); Heldring: Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University(email: leander.heldring@kellogg.
northwestern.edu). Esther Duflo was the coeditor for this article. We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Thilo 
Albers, Eric Chaney, Davide Cantoni, Steven Cole, Paul Collins, Jonathan Chapman, Joshua Dean, Melissa Dell, 
James Fenske, Luke Jackson, Noel Johnson, Matthew Lowe, Nathan Nunn, James Robinson, Christopher Roth, Raul 
Sánchez de la Sierra, Jakob Schneebacher, Andreas Stegmann, Jonathan Weigel, Noam Yuchtman, Roman Andres 
Zarate, and seminar participants at the 2020 ASSA meeting, the 2022 Associazione per La Storia Economica annual 
meeting, the 2022 Barcelona Summer Forum, the briq Institute, Cambridge, the Canadian Institute for Advanced 
Research, Dartmount, Düsseldorf, the Economic History Association Annual Meeting, Groningen, King’s College, 
Oxford, LSE, Lyon, McGill, Michigan, Munich, Northwestern Kellogg, Paris School of Economics, Tilburg, and 
the 2022 World Economic History Congress for valuable comments. We would like to thank Carrie Hritz for gener-
ously sharing data with us. Special thanks are due to Jacob Dahl and Emilie  Page-Perron of the Cuneiform Digital 
Library Initiative (CDLI) for help and guidance in working with the CDLI data, and to John Melling of the Oriental 
Studies department at the University of Oxford for assistance with the translation of Sumerian terms. We would also 
like to thank Sofia Badini, Adelina Garamow, Dominik Loibner, and  Jaap-Willem Sjoukema for excellent research 
assistance. All remaining errors are our own.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20201919 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.
--- Page 2 ---
2508
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
and dispute resolution, and is close to the standard view of government in welfare 
and public economics ( Baumol 1952; Samuelson 1954) . Individuals may be will-
ing to give up resources and autonomy to such a government, as part of a “social 
contract” (Locke 1689). Their willingness fundamentally stems from problems of 
externalities (Pigou 1924; Bator 1958)  and coordination failure ( Olson 1965)  in 
the private provision of public goods and services. Within this cluster, theories vary 
by what authors think the primary problem is that governments solve. In contrast, 
an influential “supply side” literature views government as an organization that is 
tasked with extraction on behalf of an elite. This idea is most prominently associ-
ated with Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels ( e.g., Engels 1878)  and has since been 
studied in archeology ( Carneiro 1970) , anthropology ( Fried 1978) , political sci-
ence (Olson 1993), and economics ( Sánchez De La Sierra 2020; Mayshar, Moav, 
and Pascali 2022) . Within this cluster, theories vary by what authors think is the 
main incentive for elites to extract in a particular location, and public good pro-
vision is thought to result from the bargaining between social groups ( Acemoglu 
and Robinson 2000; Persson, Roland, and Tabellini 2000) . We review these two 
clusters in more detail in the next section.
The setting of our study is the formation of the first states in history in southern 
Iraq. Key to testing our hypothesis is the fact that between 5000BCE and today 
Iraq’s main rivers, the Euphrates and the Tigris, shifted into their current course 
in six sudden shifts.1 We study the first shift around 2850BCE as our main natural 
experiment. Figure 1 provides a map of our study area, and Figure 2 provides a 
timeline.
A river shifting away may have created a local demand for government because 
farming relied on irrigating the otherwise arid desert (Bagg 2012; Rost 2017). In 
response, individuals usually reverted to nomadism (Wilkinson 1977), but in our 
setting farmers could also  re-irrigate the desert through canals (Adams 1981). 
Although  small-scale canals had been provided privately, longer canals required 
to  re-irrigate after a shift may have required cooperation by distinct communities. 
The inability to credibly coordinate between communities may, in turn, have led 
to demand for government to coordinate where the river shifted away. In contrast, 
as the tax base disappeared after a river shift, incentives to expropriate weakened 
where the river shifted away. Therefore, if governments are set up by an elite to 
organize extraction, they may be more likely to form where the river shifted to, or 
where the river did not shift at all. Crucially, rivers did not shift in parallel, but broke 
through their levees at specific points along their courses, creating variation in space 
in the incentives to form states.
Under our hypothesis, we expect a river shifting away to have three main effects. 
First, communities form states where the river shifted away. Second, we observe 
the provision of public goods and services. Third, we see resources flow to the 
government in return. To test these predictions, we construct a 5×5 kilometer 
grid cell panel covering southern Iraq. For each grid cell, we gather data for five 
1 Because river shifts result from a surge in water volume brought on by extreme upriver rainfall in Turkey and 
Syria, they happen in a matter of weeks.
--- Page 3 ---
2509
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
 archeological periods spanning  3900BCE–2700BCE.2 We then reconstruct the first 
river shift in history which happened around 2850BCE. We combine these data in 
a panel  difference-in-differences design, in which we compare grid cells directly 
next to a stretch of a river that shifted away, to grid cells whose access to water was 
unchanged, before and after the shift.
To study whether river shifts led to the formation of new states, we compile a new 
archeological dataset of all states that existed between 3900BCE and 2700BCE. We 
find that a river shift away led to a 14 percentage points increase in the probability of 
a grid cell being part of a state (relative to a mean of 6 percent). This effect is entirely 
driven by communities forming new states, rather than by the expansion of existing 
states into the countryside. Our second prediction is that a river shifting away led 
to public good provision. To test this prediction, we reconstruct the  time-varying 
network of irrigation canals from archeological records. We find that the river shift-
ing away is associated with a 12 percentage point increase in the probability that a 
grid cell is irrigated by a canal. We also observe, using data on all attested defensive 
walls, that the probability that the city nearest to a treated grid cell built a defensive 
wall increased by 11 percentage points (relative to a mean of 14 percent). Our third 
prediction is that the beneficiaries of public goods are willing to  compensate the 
government. Historically, such compensation came in the form of tribute in kind. We 
collect a dataset of cuneiform tablets that indicate the presence of such tribute pay-
ment. We find that a river shift doubles the probability of tribute being recorded in 
the city nearest to where the river shifted away. As a corollary we find, using a new 
dataset of public buildings, that “state capacity” increases. The number of temples, 
palaces, and ziggurats in the nearest city increased by 0.6 relative to a mean of 0.75.
To establish a causal interpretation of these results we study the identifying assump-
tion of our model (the parallel trends assumption) by estimating treatment effects in 
periods before treatment. We find parallel  pretrends throughout. We then show that 
river shifts are uncorrelated with lagged settlement patterns. This is important because 
the presence of such correlations may indicate that farmers could have diverted or 
dammed a river. Finally, we provide evidence that river shifts occur as a consequence 
of changes in rainfall patterns in Turkey and Syria. This means that concurrent, local, 
correlated shocks are unlikely to explain the treatment effect of a river shift.3
The main attractive feature of studying this river shift as a local “demand shifter” 
for government is that cooperative and extractive theories of the origins of govern-
ment map onto the main estimated regression coefficient. Our finding that states 
form where rivers shifted away is consistent with our demand side hypothesis: states 
formed where the returns to solving coordination failure, not expropriation, were 
higher.
A central challenge to our interpretation of our main results is that historically 
state formation is rare (Scott 2017), while (latent) opportunities for profitable coor-
dination seem ubiquitous. To understand why this is the case, we split our sample 
by proxies for the costs and benefits of forming a government. We find that our 
2 These periods are classified by archeologists based on changes in styles of cultural artifacts, such as pottery. In 
our main study sample, the average period is 240 years.
3 A remaining challenge to inference is spatial correlation. We report Conley (1999) standard errors and find that 
spatial correlation does not affect the interpretation of our results.
--- Page 4 ---
2510
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
 estimated effects are concentrated where the returns to cooperation were partic-
ularly high: our effects are confined to areas where population density is higher 
before the shift and where settlement was aligned with the gradient of the landscape, 
which increased the returns to cooperation. We also find that states are more likely 
to form where the potential productivity gains from irrigation are higher, and where 
the bed of the river allows for less costly water access. These results suggest that 
relative to the outside option of migration and nomadism, state formation may often 
be unappealing. A second important challenge to our interpretation comes from the 
observation that throughout history many states have been extractive. One way to 
reconcile this observation with our findings is that governments need to be endowed 
with some enforcement power, and after the initial formation of government this 
power may be used to repress or extract. To study the effect of river shifts after the 
initial formation of the state we expand our panel to include the full  7,000-year 
range of our data,  5000BCE–1950CE. We study the effect of subsequent river shifts 
that take place under  well-known states and empires such as the Babylonian and 
Assyrian empires. We find that throughout the history of Iraq, public goods are more 
likely to be provided where rivers shifted away, indicating some degree of reciproc-
ity between state and society throughout Iraqi history.
We then study what it is the first governments did, and find that their primary 
tasks were coordination and dispute resolution. Before the formation of the first 
states, extended kinship groups, called “lineages,” would adjudicate disputes, 
coordinate through assemblies, and provide public goods locally ( Ur 2014). These 
functions continued to be performed within individual lineages after the formation 
of states, but the newly formed governments extended these functions between  
lineages. The internal structure of the government mimicked lineage organization 
with a lugal acting as the lineage head of the state ( Ur 2014; Garfinkle 2021) . We 
find support for this characterization by analyzing the text from 5,885 publicly 
available cuneiform tablets. Two results stand out: we find increased mentions in 
government records of the lower level lineage leaders, indicating their involve-
ment as implementors of collective decisions. When states formed, we also find 
the first mentions of “lugal,” the term that indicated the head of a ruling lineage.
In sum, we find evidence for a cooperative theory of the origins of government. 
Our interpretation of our findings is that, faced with a coordination problem, lin-
eages formed governments by scaling up their internal social structure to encom-
pass multiple communities. These governments coordinated through the  preexisting 
social structures to provide public services. The lineages’ willingness to partially 
relinquish authority and to pay tribute originates in the inability of lineages to coor-
dinate for the private provision of public goods. Our results are in line with standard 
economic arguments about the rationale of government intervention in the economy. 
Our results are inconsistent with Marxist theories of the origins of government that 
emphasize coercion.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section provides the 
context for our study, southern Iraq. In Section II we discuss related literature. 
Section III introduces our panel dataset and Section IV presents our estimation 
framework. Section V presents the main results of this paper. Sections VI and VII 
study heterogeneous effects and our evidence from cuneiform tablets. Section VIII 
concludes. Our online Appendix is comprised of three individual appendices, 
--- Page 5 ---
2511
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
a Results Appendix, with additional results, a Data Appendix, describing data 
sources, and an online “Atlas of  Long-Run Development in Iraq” which presents 
most of the raw data underlying this paper.
I. Setting and Context
In this section we describe the setting of our study: southern Iraq. Our study area 
is the southernmost part of the Fertile Crescent and was part of ancient Mesopotamia. 
The inhabitants of southern Iraq were at various points in time known as Sumerians, 
Akkadians, Babylonians, Cassites, Assyrians, Aechemenids, Seleucids, Parthians, 
Sassanians, and under various names of Muslim empires and dynasties. We refer to 
them as Iraqis and to our study area as southern Iraq. The plain’s area is about 30,000 
square kilometers, which is roughly equivalent to Belgium, or Vermont. We map the 
location of the plain in Figure 1. In the remainder of this section, we first characterize 
society before the start of our study. We then discuss the change in global climate 
which resulted in the necessity to irrigate to farm away from the rivers. We document 
basic facts about the first states, their internal organization, and the organization of 
irrigation before discussing the literature on the origins of government.4
Social Organization, and Climate Change after 3500BCE:  From around 
6000BCE, the principal social unit in southern Iraq was the extended household, or 
“lineage.”5 Some lineages clustered together, forming the earliest cities that are in 
our sample, such as Nippur and Uruk (Dow and Reed 2013; Allen 2022). See Figure 
AA12 in our Atlas Appendix for the distribution of settlement in the first period we 
have data for. Habitation was constrained by the fact that rainfall has always been 
too low to sustain rainfed agriculture in southern Iraq (Brayshaw, Rambeau, and 
Smith 2011; Finné et al. 2011; Hewett et al. 2022). Before about 3500BCE much of 
the region was nevertheless underwater due to high river volumes and the high sea 
level in the Persian Gulf. In this environment, Iraqis lived on the resources of the 
marsh–fish, shellfish, reeds, water fowl as well as the milk and meat of animals pas-
tured in the marshes. (Allen 2022; Gibson 1992; Dow and Reed 2013). There was 
little scope for agriculture. A key change from the perspective of our study happened 
around 3500BCE when southern Mesopotamia began to dry out (Benco 1992). This 
was due to a drop in the sea level of the Persian Gulf, progradation of the shoreline 
into the gulf as the rivers deposited sediment in the sea, reinforced by a sharp decline 
in rainfall shown in Figure 2 (Algaze 2008; Pournelle 2003; Rost 2017). Figures 
AA3 and AA4 in our Atlas Appendix map the location of rivers and marshes before 
and after this reduction in rainfall. Note that all marshes fully disappeared.6
The usefulness of shifting rivers as a natural experiment is motivated by these 
changes. From about 3000BCE farming was possible, but only close to rivers. 
4 The rest of the sections on social and political organization are based largely on Richardson (2012); Morony 
(1987); Ur (2014); van de Mieroop (1999); and Garfinkle (2021).
5 A lineage traces its ancestry back to a shared common ancestor and can therefore be bigger than an extended 
household of relatives.
6 In our dataset of settlement which we introduce in Section III we see six settlements around 5500BCE. About 
a millennium later, we see 54 settlements. Another millennium later, around when we start our study, there are 511 
settlements in the plain. See our Atlas Appendix for maps of these settlements.
--- Page 6 ---
2512
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
Because away from the large rivers irrigation required cooperation (Rost 2017; 
Bagg 2012), sudden shifts created incentives for state formation.
How Was Early Government Organized?:  Within lineages, dispute resolution, 
family matters, and other issues within the community were solved “through media-
tion by kinship figures or groups” (Gibson 1992, p. 16). Government of groups larger 
than a lineage originated in cities. Most cities that existed from about 4000BCE 
were agglomerations of  self-governing neighborhoods (Emberling 2015). The city 
neighborhoods, like every settlement outside the cities, were organized as lineages. 
Some cities, however, innovated some forms of government organization above 
these lineages/neighborhoods. We know, for example, that Uruk had several public 
or administrative buildings around 3900BCE (Heinrich 1984). After writing was 
invented around 3300BCE (Roaf 1990) we also have surviving clay tablets with 
government records ( see Section III for more detail on these tablets) .
The innovation that led to the formation of a government of a city or, eventually, 
a larger territory was the extension of lineage organization to encompass several 
lineages. Higher “levels” of government were organized internally like a lineage, 
with the head of, for example, a city performing the same functions as a head of an 
individual lineage. The key difference was that the component parts of a  higher-level 
lineage were other lineages, represented by their group leaders, rather than indi-
viduals. The resultant social structure was pyramidal with each level repeating the 
structure of its lower constituent parts. After about 2900BCE in a period that arche-
ologists term the “Early Dynastic I” period, some cities administer a larger area, 
potentially containing other cities and settlements (Postgate 2017; Nissen 1988). We 
discuss the key facts of the political history of each city in our sample in Section 5 
of our Atlas Appendix. We map cities and states in Figure 3.
The Governance of the State: The government of a state was headed by the leader 
of the ruling household (Ur 2014). Decisions at every level were made between 
the heads of the relevant group, likely together with an assembly of community 
members (van  de Mieroop 1999; Jacobsen 1943; Bailkey 1967). Higher level 
government officials, including the head of the ruling lineage, the lugal, had no 
enforceable direct authority over individuals but essentially co-opted the heads of 
the lineages into their enlarged households. The heads of lineages, in turn, ensured 
implementation of collective decisions within their communities. Within kinship 
groups,  established norms of reciprocity ensured delivery of tribute to the head of 
their lineage, and, through the head, to the government as well.7
The Role of the Government in Irrigation:  It is clear that throughout the Iraqi 
desert, individuals faced what we think of as standard coordination problems lead-
ing to socially inefficient provision and use of public resources. Even as late as 
1948, “infringements of agreements about the quantity of water to be drawn from 
7 For Max Weber, such states would be called “patrimonial.” His distinction between patrimonial states and 
bureaucratic states lies in the fact that government officials are appointed based on their person, and their reach 
within their communities. Once offices exist separately from the people occupying them, and selection into office is 
based on merit we can, according to Weber, speak of a bureaucratic state (Weber 1978).
--- Page 7 ---
2513
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
the channels used in common are the cause of many feuds” (Gruber 1948, p. 73). 
For the first states in Iraq, “the cutting and maintaining of irrigation canals was 
an important royal duty” (Ur 2014, p. 9). 8 However, the available evidence sug-
gests that government authorities only coordinated the implementation of mainte-
nance between different groups in society (Schrakamp 2018).9 The actual execution 
of tasks was fully decentralized, with the ruling family “ co-opting local profes-
sional groups who were left on their own to handle the actual delivery of the labor” 
(Garfinkle 2021, p. 158; see also Ur 2014). Individuals who appeared to have been 
part of the government “would in fact have been heads of major lineages or groups 
of lineages, representing their constituencies” (Gibson 1992, p. 16). The consensus 
in the literature on the involvement of the government in irrigation then is that the 
government coordinated, leaving implementation to local lineages. We return to this 
insight in Section VII..
II. The Literature
In this section we review existing theories of the origins of government, which 
form two broad clusters. One cluster emphasizes cooperation, and a “social con-
tract.” The idea of a social contract is that a group of people voluntarily cedes priv-
ileges to a subgroup of individuals. These people form a government and provide 
government services. The other cluster, what we termed the extractive theories of 
government, starts from an imbalance in coercive power between people. The more 
powerful “elite” form a state to manage taxation and other forms of extraction. 10 
Public good provision results from subsequent negotiation between social groups 
(Acemoglu and Robinson 2000).
A. Two Clusters of Theories on the Origins of States and Government
The government as a cooperative organization that provides public goods and 
services has its origins in the notion of a social contract advanced by Hobbes, Locke, 
and Rousseau.11 For Hobbes the main public good is peace, and the social contract 
prevents conflict, which would prevail in the “state of nature.” In exchange for the 
guarantee of peace, people give up authority to the government and treat “all the 
actions and judgments, of that man, or that assembly of men… as if they were his 
own” (Hobbes 1651, p. 54). For Locke, too, individuals “by their own consents, … 
make themselves members of some politic society” (Locke 1689, p. 62). In Locke’s 
version of the social contract, the government is constrained by the social contract 
to a set of minimal tasks, most prominently dispute resolution. Disputes arise from 
the fact that, in the hypothetical state of nature, exercise of “free will” leads to 
8 For more background on the role of government in irrigation, see Postgate (2017).
9 Rost and Selz (2011) provide a detailed case study for one particular canal close to Lagash. The state was 
involved in coordinating the maintenance work of various groups that benefited from the canal, such as a temple, 
various professional groups, as well as individuals.
10 This distinction into two clusters is known as “contract” and “predatory or exploitation” in economic history 
(North 1979), “voluntaristic” and “coercive” in archeology (Carneiro 1970), and “integration” and “conflict” in 
anthropology (Service 1978).
11 For a discussion of the intellectual precursors to these authors, as well as for a discussion of the philosophical 
critiques of social contract theory, see Lessnoff (1986).
--- Page 8 ---
2514
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
opposing interests and a breakdown of cooperation.12 Locke’s version of the social 
contract is closest to the way economists have conceptualized the rationale for gov-
ernment (intervention). The government is an organization that has a comparative 
advantage in providing public goods (Baumol 1952; Samuelson 1954). The private 
underprovision of public goods goes fundamentally back to problems of external-
ities (Pigou 1924; Bator 1958) and cooperation (Olson 1965). We build on these 
authors’ work by extending their rationales for government intervention to the ori-
gins of government.
Another cluster of theories takes as a starting point the existence of some imbal-
ance in power between individuals or groups. Government is founded by and elite 
to manage “the glaring conflict in economic interests between the tiny ruling class, 
and the vast majority who were left with a bare subsistence” (Childe 1950, p. 4). 
In an already socially stratified society, the state is a “formal organisation of power 
[which] has as its central task the protection (and often extension) of the order of 
stratification” (Fried 1978, p. 36). The notion that the government is an organization 
used by an elite to repress society is most prominently associated with the work of 
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Engels writes: “the state, that is, an organization of 
the exploiting class … for the maintenance of its external conditions of production 
… for the forcible holding down of the exploited class in the conditions of oppres-
sion … ” (Engels 1878, pp. 314-15). In the more recent literature this idea is closely 
associated with the work of Mancur Olson, who envisioned “roving bandits” to form 
a state where the return to extraction was highest (Olson 1993).13
In sum, cooperative theories of government emphasize that individuals willingly 
form a government. Extractive theories of the state, on the other hand, emphasize 
extraction as a result of a power imbalance between groups in society. We now dis-
cuss the literature that has built on these ideas trying to understand when and where 
states form.
Where Does the State Form?:  The literature that studies where the state forms 
has largely focused on variation in geography, and the resulting incentives for state 
formation. The most prominent explanation is that states form where agriculture 
has been innovated (Childe 1950; Diamond 1997). The argument typically is that 
agricultural surplus led to population growth, urbanization, and the emergence of a 
state.14 Some authors  de-emphasize agriculture, and claim that as population grows 
and social interactions get more complex, new forms of governance are required for 
productive coexistence (Boserup 2011; Wright and Johnson 1975). These theories 
are typically consistent with both a cooperative view of government as well as an 
extractive view. In the recent literature, Borcan, Olsson, and Putterman (2021) find 
empirical support for a correlation between the transition to agriculture and ear -
lier state formation. Other authors emphasize parameters in the choice problem of 
forming a state as predictive for where states will form. Carneiro (1970) argued that 
12 Rousseau added a notion of political power to these theories. In his view, elites, after “signing” the contract 
along with everyone else, have more use of the state as they gain more by protecting property. By signing the con-
tract, the disenfranchised ran “headlong into their chains” (Rousseau 1839, p. 79).
13 In anthropology, this idea is most closely associated with Fried (1978).
14 In anthropology, the idea of such “stages” of development is most closely associated with the proposed stages 
of societal progress from bands to tribes, chiefdoms, and states (Service 1962; Sahlins and Service 1960).
--- Page 9 ---
2515
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
where productive land is surrounded, or “circumscribed,” by less productive land, 
it is less attractive to run away. Similarly, Scott (2017) argues that the adoption of 
particular crops may facilitate taxation. These theories are more consistent with an 
extractive view of the origins of government. Recent empirical work finds support 
for these ideas. Mayshar, Moav, and Pascali (2022) show that where agricultural 
surplus is storable, and therefore taxable, rather than agricultural productivity, cor -
relates with the historical location of states. Similarly, Allen (1997); Schönholzer 
(2017); and Mayoral and Olsson (2019) provide evidence find that states from 
where it is harder to run away. 15 Another strand of literature emphasizes irriga-
tion per se. Most prominently, Wittfogel (1976) argued that the state is necessary 
to provide complex irrigation networks. Where these networks develop, Wittfogel 
argued, the state becomes repressive. Bentzen, Kaarsen, and Wingender (2017) 
provide evidence that historical dependence on irrigation correlates with autocracy 
today. However, since geography is fixed, these studies typically yield less sharp 
predictions on when the state will form. For example, the invention of agriculture 
preceded states by several millennia.16 We now discuss the literature on the timing 
of the formation of the state.
When Does the State Form?: The most prominent explanation for the timing of 
state formation is war or conflict. Whereas social contract theorists argue that states 
form to mitigate conflict, a large number of authors across the social sciences and 
humanities see war and conflict as the prime mover. Typically, these authors take 
the viewpoint that the origins of the state are extractive. States form by conquest 
which is, in turn, motivated by repressive elites or “roving bandits” desire to expro-
priate (Oppenheimer 1922; Olson 1993) .17 A recent literature in economics has 
found empirical support for this idea. Sánchez De La Sierra ( 2020) estimates the 
effect of a change in attractiveness of taxation as a result of resource prices on the 
efforts of armed groups to start taxing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
Mayoral and Olsson ( 2019) find that shocks to circumscription facilitate state  
formation.18
In sum, although  cooperation-based theories are prominent in the theoretical liter-
ature, most empirical studies have focused on the relationship between the presence 
of the state and various measures of incentives for extraction. The contribution of 
our paper is to try to distinguish between the two clusters of theories. 19 We predict 
that states will form where the returns to cooperation are high enough. The returns 
15 Dal Bó, Hernández, and Mazzuca (2022) also emphasize geographical factors as important in predicting 
where surplus generation and the simultaneous protection of surplus will arise.
16 Finally, our paper relates to a literature that studies economic development in the ancient past (Barjamovic 
et al. 2019; Chaney 2013; Bakker et al. 2021; Dow and Reed 2013). In particular, Benati and Guerriero (2022) 
study a model of granting of rights in early Mesopotamia, starting after the formation of the first states. The core 
prediction is that as temperature falls elites grant concessions to ensure sharing of food. In a  half-century panel of 44 
cities between  3050–1750BCE, the authors find a correlation between changes in temperature and the rights granted 
to  nonelites. See also Benati, Guerriero, and Zaina (2022).
17 Naturally, once a state exist, it may build up capacity to defend itself against others. This idea is most prom-
inently associated with Tilly (1992) who, in the context of Europe, argued that interstate competition led to an 
expansion of state capacity.
18 Others emphasize changing patterns of trade (Algaze 2008). There is empirical support for this idea in the 
context of Africa (Fenske 2014). See also Ang (2015).
19 Some empirical evidence is consistent with both theories. For example, a correlation between population 
density and state formation could be consistent with both theories.
--- Page 10 ---
2516
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
to cooperation may depend on many factors, and we use river shifts to exogenously 
increase them.
In the remainder of our paper we discuss our data, our empirical strategy to test 
our hypothesis, and our results.
III. Data
In this section we describe the data we use. We rely on archeological micro 
data that has been collected over the last century by the Oriental Institute of the 
University of Chicago as the basis for our dataset. The core of these studies is a 
reconstruction of settlement and cities from about 5000BCE until 1950CE. We 
build on our digitized version of this data, and augment it with measures of state 
formation, state capacity, public good provision, and tribute payment. Naturally, 
using archeological data comes with its own challenges, which we discuss at 
length in our Data Appendix and in brief in the next paragraph. We also provide 
all raw data, either in map form or in list form, in our Atlas. Finally, Table 1 pres-
ents summary statistics.
Using Archeological Data: There are three main conceptual challenges to using 
archeological data: selection into sample, selection into treatment, and what we call 
selection into hypothesis. Selection into sample would occur if archeologists apply 
more search effort in some places than others, which seems natural. To alleviate 
this problem, we take advantage of the fact that southern Iraq has been covered by 
“sweep surveys.” These are surveys designed to cover the full settlement history of 
contiguous areas and to record all known historical cities and villages. For example, 
all surveys of settlement and canals by the Chicago Oriental Institute were carried 
out with the explicit objective of recording the universe of settlements and canals. 
In other words, they document the full extent of human activity over an extended 
period. Through these surveys, we also know the location of each city that existed 
in southern Iraq.20
Selection into treatment would occur if archeologists were more likely to search—
or it is easier to search—where rivers shifted. In Table 2 we provide  balance checks 
that show that this is not the case. A more subtle variant of this selection prob-
lem occurs through artifact survival. If treatment led to permanent depopulation 
or instead to urbanization, it could be easier (or harder) for archeologists to find 
remains in treated areas. In Table RA1 of the Results Appendix, we show that eco-
nomic activity in 1950 is balanced with respect to treatment suggesting that eco-
nomic activity today does not differentially obscure potential historical finds around 
where the river shifted.
20 Barjamovic et al. (2019) show how many cities are potentially missed if we could not rely on a systematic 
survey of southern Iraq. We locate virtually all cities, but not all cities have been excavated (most notably Akkad, 
the capital of the Akkadian empire). For such cities, we record building history from written sources, if these are 
available. For the city of Akkad, for example, we know that a royal palace and a ziggurat existed in the Akkadian 
period from Meyers (1997). If a city is neither excavated nor do we have textual records, we set all cells nearest to 
that city to missing. As explained in more detail in our Data Appendix, we have four cities that were never exca-
vated: Akshak, Bad Tibira, Kesh, and Larak. In the Results Appendix, we provide a robustness check where we 
include these cities but with zero buildings.
--- Page 11 ---
2517
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
Finally, by selection into hypothesis we mean that archeologists often search 
with a theme in mind, such as political history. If so, absence of evidence for, say, 
state formation could simply mean that archeologists did not look for evidence of 
state formation, rather than states being absent. We mitigate this concern through 
triangulation. To ensure that our conclusions do not rely on one source collected 
with a particular hypothesis in mind, we test our own hypotheses using data from 
different sources. For example, our data on state borders, administrative build-
ings, canals, and cuneiform tablets each come from a separate source. These were 
collected with a different research objective but we use them together to test our 
hypothesis.
A. Unit of Observation and Study Periods
To situate our study, we provide four maps that successively zoom in from the 
 Middle East to our study area in southern Iraq in Figure 1. Panels B–D show Baghdad 
and the modern courses of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers.
 Cross-Sectional Unit of Observation:  Our  cross-sectional unit of observation is 
a 5×5 kilometer grid cell. We cover the union of the archeological surveys in our 
dataset, resulting in a dataset of 1,374 grid cells covering most of the area between 
the modern Euphrates and Tigris rivers between Baghdad and modern Basra. We 
provide more detail on the exact survey coverage of each survey in Section 1.2 of the 
Table 1—Summary Statistics
Observations Mean SD Min Max
Main study period sample
River shift (yes/no) 6,870 0.15 0.35 0.00 1.00
River shift closer (yes/no) 6,870 0.13 0.33 0.00 1.00
No. of settlements 6,482 0.32 1.01 0.00 13.00
City (yes/no) 6,870 0.01 0.10 0.00 1.00
Canal (yes/no) 6,482 0.23 0.42 0.00 1.00
Under city state (yes/no) 6,830 0.06 0.24 0.00 1.00
New state (yes/no) 6,830 0.03 0.18 0.00 1.00
Existing state (yes/no) 6,830 0.03 0.16 0.00 1.00
Admin. building (yes/no) 6,411 0.11 0.32 0.00 0.00
Wall (yes/no) 6,411 0.13 0.34 0.00 1.00
Tribute (yes/no) 6,411 0.18 0.38 0.00 1.00
No. admin. build. 6,411 0.70 2.36 0.00 20.00
Extended study period sample
River shift (yes/no) 42,594 0.02 0.13 0.00 1.00
Canal (yes/no) 36,970 0.33 0.47 0.00 1.00
Cross sectional data
Average rainfall (mm) 1,374 11.93 2.55 8.08 20.08
Average temperature (C) 1,374 23.14 0.38 22.46 24.02
Urban indicator period last  pre-period 1,374 0.01 0.11 0.00 1.00
High economic returns to irrigation (yes/no) 1,374 0.60 0.49 0.00 1.00
Low water flow volume (yes/no) 1,374 0.38 0.49 0.00 1.00
High settlement density area (yes/no) 1,374 0.40 0.49 0.00 1.00
Settlement misaligned for canals (yes/no) 1,374 0.50 0.50 0.00 1.00
Surveyed (yes/no) 1,374 0.80 0.40 0.00 1.00
--- Page 12 ---
2518
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
Data Appendix and we map this grid in panel D of Figure 1. 21 We refer to the area 
covered by these grid cells as our sample area.
Periodization: We observe each grid cell for each of 31 historical periods, cover-
ing 5000BCE until 1950CE, when the archeological surveys which form the basis of 
our dataset started. Table DA1 in our Data Appendix lists each period in our dataset. 
In this table, we also list the start and end years of each period in the Gregorian cal-
endar. These periods are standard in the archeological literature. For example, the 
“Jemdet Nasr period” is the last  pre-period in our main regressions and lasted from 
3100BCE to 2900BCE. The Early Dynastic I period is our treatment period and 
spans between 2900BCE and 2700BCE. Following archeological conventions for 
periodization allows us to chronologically combine different archeological sources 
with the river shifts, which we date by calendar year.
Main Study Period:  Within our panel, we mainly restrict our focus to the first 
recorded river shift in history. The first recorded shift is dated at 2850BCE. 22 This 
shift approximately coincides with the start of the Early Dynastic I period around 
2900BCE. We consider four  pre-periods which together cover 1,000 years of devel-
opment before the first river shift. Archeologists refer to these  pre-periods as the 
Early Uruk, Middle Uruk, Late Uruk, and Jemdet Nasr periods. Combined with 
the treatment period, our main estimation sample forms a  five-period panel of 5×5 
kilometer grid cells, covering the period 3900BCE–2700BCE. In this sample, an 
average period is about 240 years, and not all periods are equally long. 23 We refer 
to the timespan of this sample as our “main study period.” In subsequent analy-
ses we extend our sample period to cover the period 5000BCE–1950CE. In this 
“extended study period,” an average period is 228 years. We indicate both the main 
study period and the extended study period in Figure 2.
B. Treatment: Measuring Shifting Rivers
The treatment of interest in our study is a shifting river. Between 5000BCE and 
today, the Euphrates and Tigris shifted six times, and the first shift defines our main 
study period. Table DA3 in the Data Appendix provides detail on each shift. We 
graphically depict the timing of each shift in Figure 2, and our Atlas Appendix pro-
vides  before-after maps in Section 2.
How Do Rivers Shift?: In 5000BCE the Euphrates and Tigris had not separated 
and formed one single river flowing down the center of our sample area (see Figure 
AA1 in our Atlas) . Over time, sediment built up in its bed, and the Ur river, as it 
was called, was elevated above the plain, kept in place by natural levees formed by 
21 Historically, the Basra area was on the coast since the level of the Persian Gulf was higher. Our Atlas Appendix 
provides maps of the fluctuating coastline over time.
22 Before the shift, some branches gained in relative importance to others, but no shifts occurred. See Table DA3 
and its description in the Data Appendix for a discussion of the course of the rivers over time.
23 A natural concern is that the archeological periodization depends on changes in an outcome variable of 
interest. We do not believe that this is a concern because we primarily identify off  cross-sectional variation in the 
location of river shifts. Even if the timing of a period change would be correlated with, say, political events, where 
a river shift is, as we will show, not.
--- Page 13 ---
2519ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
Figure 1. Sample Area
Notes: Panel A depicts the Middle East using current country borders. The bounding box in panel A is the full extent 
of B. Panel B also maps Baghdad and the current fl  ow of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers. The bounding box in panel 
B is the extent of C. All further maps in this paper are zoomed in to the extent of panel C. The archeological surveys 
that form the core of our dataset focus on this area because historically the Persian Gulf reached the southern part 
of this map. The “Atlas of  Long-Run Development in Iraq” (included in the online Appendix) shows the fl  uctuating 
coastline over time. Panel D shows our unit of observation, a 5×5 kilometer grid cell overlaid on the sample area.
Panel A. The Middle East
Iraq Iran
Saudi Arabia
1,000 km
Panel B. Southern Iraq
Iran
Saudi Arabia
Euphrates
Kuwait
Tigris
300 km
Panel C. Historical Southern Iraq
Iran
Euphrates
Tigris
Iran
Euphrates
Tigris
100 km
Panel D. Unit of observation: Grid cells
100 km
Baghdad
BaghdadBaghdad
--- Page 14 ---
2520
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
 sediments from its floor pushed to the side by the weight of the water.24 The Ur river, 
as well as the Euphrates and the Tigris later on, originate(d) in Turkey and Syria, and 
their flow volume is determined in part by rainfall there. 25 Due to surges in water 
flow upstream, the downstream flow volume of the Tigris can double in the span of 
two days, and the level in the river can rise by as much as six meters ( Soroush and 
Mordechai 2018). When this happens, the increased pressure on the levees may cause 
a break and a river shift. Rivers did not shift in parallel, but found another bed in the 
almost level plain from the break point down. 26 Such river shifts can take place in 
the span of weeks or even days. We empirically validate the link between upstream 
rainfall and downstream shifts in two ways, directly and indirectly. As a direct test, 
we plot the  time series of rainfall in Turkey and river shifts in our sample area in 
Figure RA1. We see that the first river shift in our sample coincides with a period of 
highly variable rainfall in the mountains where the river originated. Second, we show 
in Section IVB that our first river shift does not correlate with lagged human activity, 
suggesting an exogenous and geographical origin for this shift.
24 The discussion in this section is based on chapter 1 in Adams (1981); Rost and Selz (2011); and Bagg (2012).
25 For the Tigris, high water usually comes in April, for the Euphrates, early May.
26 Levee breaks happen regularly, but large shifts are infrequent because often, when a levee broke, the resulting 
decrease in flow speed (as the water now covers more area) led to sediment deposit which would fill up the opened 
gap in the levee.
Figure 2. Rainfall, States, and River Shifts
Notes: This figure shows a  time series of rainfall, and a  time-series of the fraction of our sample that is part of a 
state. Around 3000BCE, rainfall declined precipitously. This coincided with a reduction in river flow volume and a 
retreat of the Persian Gulf, leaving Iraqis with irrigated agriculture as the main mode of subsistence. Subsequently, 
the first large river shift took place in our sample area, indicated as “1”. After the river shift, new states formed. 
See Figure 3 for detailed maps of human activity before and after this shift. We also indicate the span of time cov-
ered by our main analyses as the “main study period,” and the span of time covered by our full panel dataset as the 
“extended study period.”
1 2 3 4 5 6
Main study period
Extended study period
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−5500 −4500 −3500 −2500 −1500 −500 500 1500
Year (BCE/CE)
Fraction of sample area under state
Rainfall (← wetter, drier →)
Legend:
Fraction of sample 
area under state
Average rainfall
--- Page 15 ---
2521
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
Reconstructing River Shifts:  To measure the position of the rivers before and 
after each shift, we rely on reconstructions by archeologists and geographers (e.g., 
Cole and Gasche 1998). To measure the timing of each shift, we proceed in two 
steps. First, if a precise year of a shift is available in the secondary historical or 
geography literature, we record this. For example, this is the case for our main river 
shift. Second, if only an approximate window is available, we use our rainfall data 
to date the shift within a  fifty-year window.27 We elaborate on this dating method 
in the Data Appendix, Section 2. Importantly, a break in a levee may occur any-
where along the course of a river. Below the break point, the river will shift whereas 
above the break point, the course of the river is stable. Therefore, every shift creates 
 cross-sectional variation.
Measurement: To measure a river shift at the level of the grid cell, we implement 
the following procedure. For each panel period  t , a grid cell  c  is “on a river” if its 
centroid is within five kilometers of the nearest river. We define grid cell  c  as being 
treated in period  t  if  c  was on a river in period  t − 1  and is no longer in period  t .  
Measuring treatment this way captures the idea that settlements with their own inde-
pendent water source can now only farm productively if water is brought in through 
a canal. When we average distance to the river before and after each shift across 
grid cells that were on a river before a shift, we find that rivers shift by 30 to 40 
kilometers.28
C. Outcome Variables
In this section, we describe the main outcome variables used in this paper. The 
main challenge our data collection effort overcomes is that written records on 
 governments and states are typically produced and preserved by states. It is there-
fore challenging to learn about the origins of the state as an organization. Our solu-
tion is to collect archeological evidence for state formation, public good provision, 
and the functioning of government. As a basis for all our datasets, we reconstructed 
the full settlement history of southern Iraq.
Villages and Cities: We collect data on settlements from three large archeological 
projects by the Chicago Oriental Institute (Adams 1965, 1981; Adams and Nissen 
1972). These projects aimed to reconstruct the full settlement history of southern 
Iraq. We map the areas covered by each project survey in Figure DA1 of the Data 
Appendix. The main advantage of using these surveys is that they were collected 
with the aim to capture all settlement over time in their study area. By starting from 
where we know settlements were located, we are more confident that we do not 
miss any states just because the cities they were based in have not been excavated. 
To achieve this, we record each settlement identified by the archeological teams as 
27 Note that above we used the rainfall data to validate the timing of the first river shift. We do this because we 
have an exact date for this shift from the secondary literature. Here we use the rainfall data to more precisely date 
subsequent river shifts.
28 Through our use of shifting rivers as a source of identification, our paper is related to Hornbeck and Naidu 
(2014) who use a historical flood to identify the effect of the presence of  low-skilled labor in the United States 
south, and Chaney (2013) who uses Nile floods to identify the effect of political power of religious leaders.
--- Page 16 ---
2522
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
well as each archeological period in which it was settled.29 We discuss the approach 
of the archeological teams and the advantages it offers us in more detail in the Data 
Appendix, Sections 1.1 and 4. 30 Larger settlements are often known by name, and 
we refer to these as cities.31 In total we identify 62 cities as part of the archeological 
surveys or through secondary sources, which we map in Figure DA6 of our Data 
Appendix and we discuss each city individually in Section 5 of our Atlas. 32
States and Bureaucracy:  States over different periods were governed from 
administrative buildings, where the head of the ruling lineage of the state lived. 
These buildings were located in a city, and have been classified as either palaces, 
temples or ziggurats. A ziggurat was a large, elevated platform that was typically 
the center of a government area. Over our entire study period, we identify a total of 
444 buildings (62 palaces, 423 temples , and 21 ziggurats) that existed at any point 
in a city from our sample. In our main study period, we record 64 administrative 
buildings.
To measure whether a grid cell was part of a state we use a  two-step procedure. 
We describe the procedure in brief here and in full detail in Section 7 of our Data 
Appendix. We start with cities. We record whether there is a administrative building 
in a city in a particular period from Heinrich (1982, 1984); Meyers (1997); and 
Bryce (2009). We then record the outer borders of the territory administered from 
these buildings. This may be only the city itself and the immediate surrounding 
countryside—as is the case before our treatment period—or a larger area around 
the city, which is the case for some cities in our treatment period. We code a grid 
cell as being part of a state if it falls within the boundaries governed by a city with 
an administrative building, and we vary this definition in our Results Appendix.33
29 Carrie Hritz generously shared her digitization of the originals with us.
30 In total, 13,131 grid  cell-periods are settled over our extended study period by 4,372 archeological sites. Of 
these 1,796 exist at any point during our main study period. Naturally, archeologists can not record every settlement. 
Adams (1981) discusses how settlements smaller than one hectare are not in the data.
31 Most cities in our sample are part of the archeological surveys, but some fall just outside the reach of the 
surveyor teams. We therefore extend the archeological surveys in one key dimension. Using secondary sources on 
individual cities, we extend our sample of cities to record known cities around our sample area. We depict these in 
each map in this paper and, when recording outcomes in the nearest city to a grid cell, such cities can function as 
nearest cities for grid cells in the sample area.
32 Since we have data going back to the earliest human occupation in the region around 5300BCE, we can use 
our settlement data to paint a unique picture of economic development in Iraq. We do so in the Atlas, where we show 
settlement patterns over time, and provide maps of settlement in each of our 31 archeological periods. For example, 
in the Early Uruk period (3900BCE–3600BCE), 202 out of 1,325 grid cells are settled. On average, a settled grid 
cell has 2.3 settlements, and the maximum number of settlements is 13. Aside from smaller settlements, we have 
identified eleven cities that were inhabited in this period. Uruk is the most important, but other  well-known exam-
ples are Ur, Nippur, and Sippar. In the Middle Uruk period (3600BCE–3500BCE), 225 grid cells are inhabited, and 
the city of Esnunna (modern Tell Asmar) was founded. In the Late Uruk period (3500BCE–3100BCE), 228 grid 
cells were inhabited, and Khafagi was founded.
33 Note that the presence of irrigation infrastructure made boundaries relatively well demarcated as the reach of 
the canal network that was maintained from a city led to a natural demarcation between the area watered by canals, 
and the area outside. Hans Nissen writes that after the founding of the city states “… the borderlines between 
 canal-irrigated and unirrigated land, between land suitable for agriculture and land that could not be cultivated, 
became increasingly fixed.” (Nissen 1988, p.141). In the periods preceding the Early Dynastic I period we only 
consider grid cells immediately adjacent a capital city (6 kilometer radius) as being within state boundaries. This 
definition of a city’s hinterland is based on estimates of the supporting countryside from Nissen (1988) and Adams 
(1981). We vary the size of a city’s hinterland in a robustness check. As discussed in Section I, from 3000BCE terri-
torial states form, and we code a grid cell as being part of a state if it falls within the border of a state as defined by 
Lafont et al. (2017). We vary the definition of states in Table 3 and in the Results Appendix for robustness.
--- Page 17 ---
2523
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
In Figure 3 we provide a graphical intuition for our historical reconstruction of 
states. We map the political situation in our sample area before and after the first 
river shift, shift 1 in Figure 2. In panel A we show the situation before the first river 
shift, around 2900BCE.  We indicate cities without an administrative building and 
cities with at least one administrative building. For this  pre-period, we observe five 
cities that have at least one administrative building: Esnunna, Khafagi, Tell Uqair, 
Tell Jemdet Nasr, and Uruk. In panel B we map states around 2700BCE. Esnunna 
has expanded its territory. Khafagi, Tell Uqair, and Tell Jemdet Nasr no longer 
 govern. In the south, Uruk has expanded its territory and Abu Salabikh, Nippur, 
Adab, Umma, and Larsa have formed as new states.34
Public Good Provision, and Public Administration: We measure the presence 
of public goods mainly through a reconstruction of the full  time-varying canal net-
work. In addition, we measure defense through the presence of defensive walls. We 
reconstruct the canal network from the excavation reports by the Chicago Oriental 
Institute (Adams 1965, 1981; Adams and Nissen 1972). We measure the presence of 
irrigation canals by an indicator equal to one if a grid cell was within five kilometers 
of a canal. In total, we record 1,117 individual canals, of which 151 from our main 
study period. We describe the full coding procedure for the canals in Section 4 of 
the Data Appendix. We measure the presence of defensive walls using data from 
Bryce (2009) and Meyers (1997). We code an indicator variable equal to one if the 
city nearest to grid cell  c  had a defensive wall in period  t . We observe a total of 35 
cities with a wall over our extended study period and 10 in the main study period. 
We describe the full coding procedure and additional city-specific sources for city 
walls in Section 6.4 of the Data Appendix.
Cuneiform Tablets: We study the internal organization of the early states using 
data from 6,573 cuneiform tablets that survive from our main study period, are pub-
lished, and were made available by the Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative (CDLI). 
Texts were recorded in cuneiform script by impressing a stylus in a soft clay tablet. 
The consensus opinion among scholars is that the vast majority of these tablets are 
records of economic transactions (Englund 2011; Nissen 1993; Nissen, Damerow, 
and Englund 1993; Nissen 1986). Since in our main study period tablets were exclu-
sively used by the government, these transactions are thought to be records of col-
lection or redistribution of tribute payments (Pollock 1999; Bramanti 2020; Lafont 
et al. 2017). In Section 8 of our Data Appendix, we discuss the historical context of 
these tablets, and their subject matter, in more detail. For our analyses, we code sev-
eral variables from these tablets. 35 As a first outcome, we code, for each  grid-cell, 
an indicator equal to one if a cuneiform tablet was found for a period in the nearest 
city. For the subset of 5,885 tablets for which transliterations are available, we code 
34 Ur and Girsu were the centers of states as well, but these fall largely outside our sample area, and we there-
fore have not mapped them here. We map them in our Atlas Appendix. We code any grid cells that fall within their 
borders as being part of a state.
35 As most tablets have not been translated we rely on the transliteration of the cuneiform signs into their Latin 
alphabet and Arab numeral equivalents. We conduct a keyword search to code several indicators for administra-
tive activities. We discuss our methodology in Section VII and the list of Sumerian keywords we use in detail in 
Section 8.2 of the Data Appendix. We are indebted to John Melling of the department of Oriental Studies at the 
University of Oxford for expert help in preparing our list of keywords.
--- Page 18 ---
2524 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
several indicators for more specifi  c government functions which we introduce in 
Section VII.
The richness of our data is extraordinary compared to other parts of the world. 
This has two reasons. First, being known as the cradle of civilization, southern 
Iraq has been extensively studied. Second, since the desert is fl  at, and uninhabited 
remains of settlements and canals are easily visible in the desert.36
 36 Sir Austen Layard, one of the fi  rst archeologists to excavate, wrote in 1853: 
The plains between  Khan-i-Zad and the Euphrates are covered with a perfect network of 
ancient canals and watercourses; … The face of the country, too, is dotted with mounds and 
shapeless heaps, the remains of ancient towns and villages. (Postgate 2017, p.17).
On the causes of the depopulation of the southern Iraqi plain, see Allen and Heldring (2022).
Figure 3. Before and after the River Shift
Notes: The panel A maps settlements, cities, cities with administrative buildings, and states in the last  pre-period 
before the fi  rst river shift, indicated as shift 1 in Figure 2. Settlements are indicated as small diamonds. Cities, large 
settlements known by name, are large diamonds. Cities with administrative buildings are indicated with large cir-
cles. We indicate their hinterlands with circles. We also indicate rivers with solid lines, and canals with dashed lines. 
Note that in the south of our sample area there are no canals. The canals in the north divert water from the Diyala 
river valley, which comes down from the mountains. In panel B we map the situation about 150 years after the river 
shift. Note that the course of the rivers has changed. Most importantly, several states have formed. We indicate these 
by the name of their main city.
Uruk
Esnunna
Larsa
Umma
Nippur Adab
Abu Salabikh
100 km
Uruk
Tell Jemdet Nasr
Esnunna
Khafagi
Tell Uqair
Iran
Persian Gulf/
Marshes 
Iran
Persian Gulf/
Marshes 
100 km
Panel A. Settlement, cities, and states before 
the river shift in 2850BCE
Panel B. Settlement, cities, and states 
after the river shift in 2850BCE
States, buildings, and settlement:
City with admin building
City
Water:
River
Canal
Settlement
StateState
States, buildings, and settlement:
City with admin building
City
Water:
River
Canal
Settlement

--- Page 19 ---
2525
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
IV . Estimation Framework
Our dataset of grid cells and archeological periods forms a balanced panel cover-
ing southern Iraq in our main study period: 3900BCE to 2700BCE. In this section 
we introduce our estimation framework to estimate the treatment effect of a large 
river shift around 2850BCE. Because we study a single river shift that generates 
 cross-sectional variation within our panel dataset, we estimate a standard panel 
 difference-in-differences model. This model allows a simple way to test its main 
identification assumptions by estimating  pretreatment period treatment effects. We 
present this estimation framework before discussing challenges to identification.
A. Difference-in-Differences Model
We estimate a panel  difference-in-differences model, using ordinary least squares. 
Our main regression equation has the following form:
(1)   Y ct   =   ∑  
k=0
  
−4
     β  k     treatment  × 1 {perio d k  }  × treate d c   +  ρ c   +  γ t   +  υ ct   +  ε ct   .
Here   Y ct    is an outcome of interest for grid cell  c  in period  t .  k  indexes periods 
relative to treatment with   ∑  k=−4  0     βk     treatment  × 1 {perio d k  }  × treate d c    being a vector 
of  period-relative-to-treatment fixed effects multiplied with an indicator  treate d c     
which is equal to one if grid cell  c  is treated in period  k = 0 . This indicator is 
 time-invariant, and the   β  k     treatment   coefficients capture the time-varying effect of being 
treated in  k = 0  through their multiplication with the  period-relative-to-treatment 
fixed effects. We express these coefficients relative to the last  pre-period,  k = −1 . In 
the archeological periodization, our treatment period is the Early Dynastic I period, 
which spanned 2900BCE–2700BCE. Our coefficient of interest is   β   0    treatment  , the 
treatment effect in the treatment period. The  pre-period coefficients (e.g.,   β  −2    treatment  ),  
capture  pretrends.
This model neither assumes that there are no average differences between treat-
ment and control, nor that there are no average differences between periods. These 
differences are absorbed by the unit fixed effects   ρ c    and period fixed effects   γ t   . Rather, 
we study grid cells over time, comparing the average difference in the outcome of 
interest  posttreatment relative to  pretreatment, across treatment and control.37
  υ ct    is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with  time-invariant covariates. We 
include three indicator variables for the three large archeological survey areas cov-
ered by the Chicago Oriental Institute.38 We also include rainfall, temperature, and 
urban status, defined as having a city in a grid cell in the last  pretreatment period. 
If, for example, average rainfall decreases before a river shift, then period fixed 
37 We employ two simple sample restrictions throughout all analyses. First, we drop grid cells that saw a new river 
branch move closer to them, rather than further away. Treatment effects are similar with and without this restriction. 
Second, we drop grid cells that are within the nominal area of the survey but that were skipped by the survey teams. 
We provide a robustness check that varies all these restrictions in our Results Appendix, in Tables RA8–RA11. The 
Data Appendix also reports that some outcome variables are not available for all periods. We provide an overview 
of the data availability of our main variables in Table DA4 in the Data Appendix. The fact that some outcomes are 
unavailable for some periods results in small fluctuations in the number of observations in our results.
38 We describe these surveys in detail in our Data Appendix section .
--- Page 20 ---
2526
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
effects interacted with rainfall will capture these trends. Similarly, grid cells con-
taining cities may be on different trends than grid cells in the countryside. Finally,   
ε ct    is a standard error, clustered at the grid cell level. We provide two more ways to 
conduct inference. First, to account for arbitrary spatial correlation, we also report 
Conley (1999) standard errors using a cutoff of 484 kilometers (or 4.4 decimal 
degrees, covering our entire sample area). We find that Conley standard errors are 
similar to clustered standard errors or slightly higher, but nowhere high enough 
to threaten inference. Second, for outcomes that vary at the nearest city level we 
provide additional results in which we double cluster standard errors at the level of 
the grid cell and the  nearest-city-by-period, to capture nearest city level unobserved 
heterogeneity.
Since all grid cells are treated in the same period, and we study the first treatment 
in our panel, we have a static panel without staggered treatment timing. In such data 
structures, heterogeneous treatment effects that affect the interpretation of estimated 
coefficients in more complex models are unlikely to be a major concern. Indeed, all 
weights on treated grid cells in the treatment period computed by the OLS estimator 
are positive (see De Chaisemartin and d’Haultfoeuille 2020 on this test). To ensure 
that we do not  re-weight individual treatment effects in such a way to generate a 
spurious average treatment effect, we  reestimate our results using De Chaisemartin 
and d’Haultfoeuille (2020)’s estimator in the Results Appendix Table RA6. We find 
virtually identical results.
Before presenting results in Section V , we discuss potential challenges associated 
with estimating the model introduced in this section.
B. Identification Assumptions
The key identification assumption in this model is that absent treatment, treated 
grid cells would have evolved similarly to untreated grid cells, conditional on covari-
ates. This assumption is untestable but can be studied using  pretrends. In all tables, 
we report the p-value on the estimated coefficient in  k = −2 , and we report all 
 pre-period coefficients in our Results Appendix. We find no evidence for  pretrends: 
grid cells that are going to be treated in  k = 0  look similar in  k = −2  and in earlier 
 pre-periods. In addition to parallel trends another important requirement for credible 
 difference-in-differences estimation is that a river shift does not coincide with other 
shocks. Prima facie, we expect river shifts to be exogenous because flow volume and 
breaks in the levees in Iraq were determined by rainfall shocks in Turkey and Syria 
where the rivers originated. 
We study the exogeneity of river shifts in two ways. First, we estimate equa-
tion (1) using lagged outcomes. If treatment in  k = 0  correlates with outcomes 
in  k = −1  or  k = −2  this implies that grid cells that are going to be treated in 
the future look different before treatment. This could indicate, for example, that 
river flow was manipulable. We implement this exercise in Table 2. Columns vary 
outcome variables, and the first row provides estimates of   β   0    treatment  , the measured 
effect of a river moving away from grid cell  c . We focus on the lagged values of 
the number of settlements in a grid cell, an indicator for the presence of a city, 
or an indicator for the presence of a canal. We find small and insignificant coef-
ficients. In other words, these results are inconsistent with the idea that people 
--- Page 21 ---
2527
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
manipulated river flow. Second, in Section 1.1 of our Results Appendix, we plot 
a  time series of rainfall shocks identified from data collected in the proximity of 
the source of the Euphrates and the Tigris rivers. As sudden increases in river flow 
volume are ultimately determined by rainfall there, we want to verify that the first 
river shift downstream happened in a period of high volatility in rainfall where 
the rivers originated. This is what we find. This is not a conclusive test, but is in 
line with a literature in geography that points to the sudden swelling of river flow 
volumes as the sources of breaks in levees discussed in Section III. In the next 
section, we use our model to estimate the treatment effects of the first river shift in  
our panel.
V . Results
In this section, we present the main results of the paper. We find that in response 
to a river shifting away, Iraqis formed some of the first states and governments 
in history. We also find that they constructed canals and built defensive walls. 
Finally, we find that where the rivers shift away tribute receipts are recorded, 
and the government set up the administrative infrastructure to support public 
good provision. We start by estimating the effect of a river shifting away on state  
formation.
Table 2—Balance: River Shifts and Lagged Outcomes
Dependent variable: No. of settlements City (yes/no) Canal (yes/no)
lag 1 lag 2 lag 1 lag 2 lag 1 lag 2
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
River shift (yes/no) −0.15 0.05 −0.00 0.00 0.02 0.03
(0.13) (0.08) (0.00) (0.00) (0.03) (0.03)
[0.13] [0.08] [0.00] [0.00] [0.02] [0.04]
Mean dependent variable 0.37 0.29 0.01 0.01 0.21 0.17
Observations 4,320 4,660 4,660 4,660 4,320 4,660
Clusters 932 932 932 932 932 932
Period × archeological excavation Y Y Y Y Y Y
Period × rainfall Y Y Y Y Y Y
Period × temperature Y Y Y Y Y Y
Period × urban Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes: All regressions are estimated using OLS. The  cross-sectional unit of observation is a 5×5 kilometer grid 
cell. The  time series period is an archeological period. We describe periodization in our Data Appendix Section 1.3. 
No. of settlements is the count of settlements. City (yes/no) is an indicator equal to one if a city is contained within 
a grid cell. Canal (yes/no) is an indicator variable equal to one if there is a canal within five kilometers (distances 
measured from the cell centroid). River shift (yes/no) is an indicator equal to one if the nearest river was within 
five kilometers in period  t − 1  and is further than five kilometers away in period  t  (distances measured from the cell 
centroid). All regressions include period and grid cell fixed effects. Period × archeological excavation is a vector 
of period fixed effects interacted with indicators for each of the three main archeological surveys of settlement we 
use. These surveys are described and mapped in the Data Appendix Sections 1.2 and 4. Period × rainfall is a vec-
tor of period fixed effects interacted with average rainfall. Period × temperature is a vector of period fixed effects 
interacted with average temperature. Period × urban is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with an indicator 
equal to one if a grid cell contained a city in the last  pre-period before treatment. Heteroskedasticity robust stan-
dard errors clustered at the grid cell level are in parentheses. Conley (1999) standard errors are in square brackets. 
--- Page 22 ---
2528
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
A. Result: State Formation
Graphical Intuition, State Formation:  Before showing regression evidence, we 
build intuition for our main result graphically using Figure 4. Panels A and B depict 
rivers and states before the river has shifted. In panel A we plot the river system 
before the shift, which is the same river system as in Figure 3, panel A. We indicate 
the first point where the river will break in black. In gray we indicate the subset of 
grid cells that will be treated. Note that these are all directly adjacent to the river 
and can irrigate from the river directly. In panel B we replicate this map but add two 
features. First, we map the cities that had at least one administrative building with 
their immediate hinterland. Uruk in the south is the most  well-known city, but there 
were several other cities that had administrative buildings, such as Esnunna in the 
north. In maroon diamonds we indicate which cells that will be treated were inhab-
ited before the shift.39
In panels C and D we plot the river system after the shift. River courses changed 
throughout the plain as a consequence of a surge in river water which broke through 
the levees at the location indicated by the black dot. From there, the river found a 
new path. Panel C is identical to panel A with the only change being the new courses 
of the river. Note that all treated cells are now away from the rivers. In panel D we 
repeat panel B, but we map the states that had formed by the end of the treatment 
period. First, states overlap with treated grid cells. Second, the formation of states 
is concentrated where grid cells were inhabited before the river shifted away. We 
formally estimate the average effect of the river shift on state formation in column 
1 of Table 3, and we study heterogeneous effect by  pre-shift population in columns 
2 and 3 of Table 5. 40
Main Result, State Formation: We report results from estimating equation (1) in 
Table 3. In column 1 we use as the dependent variable our indicator equal to one if 
grid cell  c  is part of a state. Row 1 contains the estimated effect of a river shifting 
away measured in the treatment period, or the Early Dynastic I period. We find a 
positive and significant treatment effect relative to the last  pretreatment period. A 
river shifting away is associated with a 14 percentage point increase in the probabil-
ity of being part of a city state (clustered SE = 0.04). Over the  five-period panel, 
the mean of this variable is 0.06, and in the treatment period it is 0.24. We study 
 pretrends in Figure 5. The  x-axis plots periods in our five period panel. Treatment 
happens at the start of period 0, and we measure outcomes at the end of period 0. 
We normalize estimated treatment effects to zero at the end of the last  pre-period 
and indicate treatment with a red vertical line. In black we plot treatment effects and 
confidence intervals. At the end of period 0 we see the same estimated treatment 
effect, 0.14. When we study  pretrends, we see that estimated treatment effects before 
39 Note that we do not map settlement outside treated cells. Refer to Figure 3 for settlement in both treated and 
untreated cells.
40 In Figure 2 we provide another piece of graphical evidence. Instead of mapping  cross-sectional difference 
before and after the shift, we plot a  time series of rainfall, with higher rainfall indicating more favorable climatic 
condition, and we graph the fraction of our sample area that is part of a state. We provide details on the coding of 
this variable for subsequent periods in our panel in Section 7 of our Data Appendix. We also indicate each river shift. 
This graph reveals an inverse correlation between favorable climate and state formation.
--- Page 23 ---
2529
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
Figure 4. The Effect of a River Shift on State Formation: Intuition
Notes: These four maps provide intuition for the treatment effect of a river shifting away. Panel A maps the river net-
work before the first river shift, indicated as shift 1 in Figure 2. Gray squares indicate grid cells that will be treated 
after the shift (see Figure 1 for the full grid). Panel B also contains the river network before the shift but now indi-
cates states, like in Figure 3. We also indicate, by small diamonds, the grid cells that are inhabited before the shift. 
In panel C we map the river network  post-shift, indicating the breaking point of the rivers as well as the treated 
grid cells, like in panel A. In panel D we map the states that form after the river shift. We also indicate settlement 
 pre-shift, like in panel B. We observe that states form where the river shifted. This effect is concentrated in inhab-
ited grid cells. We provide formal tests of this conclusion in Figure 5 and Tables 3 and 5.
Panel A. River network before the shift,
with a breaking point
Iran
Persian Gulf/
Marshes 
Persian
 Gulf 
Iran
Persian Gulf/
Marshes 
100 km
Panel B. States, and inhabited treatment
cells before the shift
Uruk
Tell Jemdet Nasr
Esnunna
Khafagi
Tell Uqair
100 km
.
Panel C. The branch /f_inds a new course
.
Iran
Persian
 Gulf 
Iran
Panel D. States after the river shift
Uruk
Esnunna
Larsa
Umma
Nippur
Adab
Abu Salabikh
Water:
River
Water:
River
Settlement and states:
City
Water:
River
State
Settlement and states:
Settlement
City
Settlement
Water:
River
State
--- Page 24 ---
2530
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
treatment are all small and indistinguishable from zero (as well as each other). The 
fact that we do not observe  pretrends, and our previous evidence on the plausible 
exogeneity of river shifts lends credence to our claim that we identify the causal 
effect of river shifts on state formation.41
Interpretation in Relation to Theories of the State:  Our main result shows that 
relative to untreated grid cells, treated grid cells were significantly more likely to be 
part of a state. One of the attractive features of our setting is that we can interpret 
this treatment effect as providing evidence that separates cooperative, or “demand,” 
and extractive, or “supply” theories of state formation we discussed in Section I. 42 
41 Because in the  pre-periods states consist of cities with an administrative buildings and their small hinterlands, 
the absence of  pretrends shows that cities with administrative buildings were not more likely to be located along 
stretches of the rivers that would shift.
42 On average, the center of the plain is more productive, further increasing the incentives to try to maintain agri-
culture through irrigation. In Results Appendix Table RA2 we show that the center of the sample area, where rivers 
flow earlier on in history is more productive, as measured by temperature, rainfall, and geographical suitability for 
growing barley, the main staple crop of the area.
Table 3—Main Result: A River Shift Leads to the Formation of New States
Dependent variable:
Under city state  
(yes/no)
New state 
(yes/no)
Existing state 
(yes/no)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
River shift (yes/no) 0.14 0.16 0.11 0.02
(0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.02)
[0.03] [0.04] [0.03] [0.01]
p-value  pretrend 0.23 0.26 0.24 0.84
Mean dependent variable 0.06 0.12 0.03 0.03
Observations 4,631 4,424 4,631 4,631
Clusters 932 932 932 932
Using reconstructed borders Y N Y Y
Period × archeological excavation Y Y Y Y
Period × rainfall Y Y Y Y
Period × temperature Y Y Y Y
Period × urban Y Y Y Y
Notes: All regressions are estimated using OLS. The  cross-sectional unit of observation is a 
5×5 kilometer grid cell. The  time series period is an archeological period. We describe period-
ization in our Data Appendix Section 1.3. Under city state (yes/no) is an indicator equal to one 
if the grid cell is part of a state. New state (yes/no) is an indicator equal to one if the grid cell 
is part of a state that did not exist in the previous period. Existing state (yes/no) is an indicator 
equal to one if the grid cell is part of a state that existed in the previous period. River shift (yes/
no) is an indicator equal to one if the nearest river was within five kilometers in period  t − 1  
and is further than five kilometers away in period  t  (distances measured from the cell centroid). 
Using reconstructed borders indicates whether we use reconstructions of historical state bor -
ders to define whether a grid cell was part of a state. If this is not the case, we only use infor -
mation on building activity in the nearest city. All regressions include period and grid cell fixed 
effects. Period × archeological excavation is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with 
indicators for each of the three main archeological surveys of settlement we use. These surveys 
are described and mapped in the Data Appendix Sections 1.2 and 4. Period × rainfall is a vec-
tor of period fixed effects interacted with average rainfall. Period × temperature is a vector of 
period fixed effects interacted with average temperature. Period × urban is a vector of period 
fixed effects interacted with an indicator equal to one if a grid cell contained a city in the last 
 pre-period before treatment. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the grid cell 
level are in parentheses. Conley (1999) standard errors are in square brackets. 
--- Page 25 ---
2531
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
If state formation is fundamentally due to greater incentives for expropriation, we 
expect state formation to be less likely where rivers shifted away and more likely 
along the rivers. Along the rivers, the tax base is intact, and no canals need to be 
provided. If, instead, states form to address the coordination problems that arise 
from collective irrigation, we would expect states to form where the river has shifted 
away. Because we observe a sizable positive and significant treatment effect of a 
Figure 5. The Effect of a River Shift on State Formation
Notes: This figure provides two  event-study graphs corresponding to our main result (panel A) and our main het-
erogeneous effect (panel B). In panel A we show treatment effects of a river shifting away. Where rivers shift away, 
states are 14 percentage points more likely to form after the river has shifted. We report the comparison mean for 
the treatment period. The  panel-wide mean of the outcome variable is 0.06. This figure corresponds to Table 3, col-
umn 1. In panel B, we split the sample by the median of population density. Density is defined by the spatial lag of 
population before the river shifted, which we discuss in Section V . In high population density cells, the treatment 
effect of the river shifting away is positive, and equal to 18 percentage points. In low population density cells, the 
treatment effect is 0.04 percentage points. We report treatment period comparison means. Full sample comparison 
means are 0.07 and 0.04. This figure corresponds to Table 5, columns 2 and 3.
River shifts
 away
High pop. dens. cells
DID-coefficient: 0.18
Comparison mean: 0.28
Low pop. dens. cells
DID-coefficient: 0.03
Comparison mean: 0.17
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Estimated effect of a river shift on
being under a state (yes/no)
Samples:
High pop. dens. pre-shift
Low pop. dens. pre-shift
River shifts
 away
Treatment effect
DID-coefficient: 0.14
Comparison mean: 0.24
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2
Estimated effect of a river shift on
being under a state (yes/no)
Panel B. Heterogeneous effects
Panel A. Main result
--- Page 26 ---
2532
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
river shifting away on state formation, and the assumptions for identification have 
plausibly been met, we interpret our main result as evidence consistent with cooper-
ative theories of the origins of the state.
This result relies on the credibility of our reconstruction of rivers and states over 
time. In our Data Appendix, we discuss this issue in detail, Sections 1.1, 2, and 7 in 
particular. We construct our indicator for whether a grid cell is part of a state from 
our data on administrative buildings and boundaries of states. We are confident in 
the archeological record on buildings. 43 The reconstruction of boundaries is more 
speculative. In column 2 we therefore recode our indicator for whether a grid cell 
is part of a state using only archeological information. We code an indicator that is 
equal to one if there is a building in the city nearest to a grid cell.44 We find a simi-
larly large, significant, and positive effect of a river shifting away on the probability 
of there being a building in the nearest city, showing that our main result in column 
1 does not depend on our use of the reconstructed borders.
New States or Expanding States?:  In columns 3 and 4 we study whether our 
main result is driven by cities that had developed some form of governance before 
2900BCE, such as Uruk and Esnunna, expanding into the countryside or whether 
the states that form after 2900BCE were new states. We start again by studying 
Figure 4. We saw in panel B and D that although both Esnunna and Uruk extended 
their territory, where the river shifted, new states, such as Nippur, Adab, and Umma, 
formed. In column 3 of Table 3 we use as the outcome variable an indicator equal to 
one if a grid cell is part of a newly formed state. In our treatment period, this means 
that we capture new states, but not Uruk and Esnunna. In earlier periods we capture 
cities that built administrative buildings but did not have one in the previous period. 
In column 4 we reverse this coding and record an indicator equal to one if a grid cell 
is part of a state that existed before treatment. The sample means of the presence 
of new and expanding states are equal showing that we have both in our sample. 
However, the main effect in column 1 is entirely driven by new states. This result 
is consistent with communities forming states to solve the coordination problems 
created by a river shifting away.45
Robustness: In Results Appendix Section 2.2, we implement several robustness 
checks, which we briefly introduce here. We establish the robustness of our results 
to excluding fixed effects and trends in covariates, to varying our unit of observation 
and sample inclusion criteria. We also vary our definition of treatment and of what it 
means to be part of a state. We then show that our inference is robust to our choice 
43 Virtually all cities have been excavated, and the stratigraphy of these excavations gives a clear indication of 
which buildings were active in which archeological periods. Stratigraphy refers to the fact that subsequent periods 
of occupation leave “layers” of debris on top of each other. Excavating down therefore gives a  time series of occu-
pation for each point of excavation.
44 Note that the mean of this variable is about double that of our main outcome in column 1 reflecting the fact 
that not using boundaries associates more cells with an administrative building.
45 The most obvious alternative interpretation of our main result is that a river shift does not shock the returns 
to cooperation but instead shocks patterns of comparative advantage. For example, Algaze (2008) points out that 
rivers and canals were used for transportation. Similarly, no longer being able to engage in agriculture may induce 
farmers to switch to nomadism. Trade patterns, in turn, have been pointed to as having fueled the rise of Uruk and 
other city states (Algaze 2008). In the Results Appendix, we test for trade as an alternative interpretation of the 
effect of a river shift, Table RA26. We fail to reject the hypothesis that river shifts have no effect on trade patterns.
--- Page 27 ---
2533
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
of estimator and standard errors. We also estimate a spatial lag model. Results are 
very similar throughout these exercises, showing that our findings are not driven by 
particular choices we made in setting up our empirical strategy. We then perform a 
placebo exercise, aimed at bolstering the interpretation of our main result. Rather 
than studying a river shifting away, we study a river shifting closer. We find a con-
sistently negative effect of a river shifting closer.46
Although our results in this section are consistent with a cooperative theory of 
the origins of the state, we have not yet provided direct evidence for public good 
provision and public administration. In the next section, we use data on public good 
provision and tribute payments to the government to substantiate our interpretation 
of our main results.
B. Result: Public Good Provision, Tribute, and State Capacity
In this section we study public good provision, tribute payment to the govern-
ment, and “state capacity.” We find that a river shift is associated with a higher 
likelihood of the construction of canals and defensive walls, a higher likelihood of 
tribute payment to the government, and a larger number of administrative buildings.
Public Good Provision: At the core of our natural experiment lies cooperation for 
irrigation. We now directly study this form of public good provision through our full 
reconstruction of the  time-varying canal network. In column 1 of Table 4 we use as 
our outcome variable an indicator equal to one if a grid cell was irrigated by a canal. 
As before, the first row contains estimates of the treatment effect of a river shifting 
away in our main estimating model, equation (1). The estimated effect in column 1 
is equal to 0.12 (clustered SE 0.03) which means that a river shifting away increases 
the probability of being on a canal by about 12 percentage points, or slightly less 
than one-half of its mean. These statistical results are clearly visible in our maps. 
Consider panel D of Figure 3. Note that the area east of Nippur and Adab is irrigated 
by canals. Compare the same area in panel B. Before the shift, this area was irrigated 
by the rivers.47
It stands to reason that governments may not only have coordinated to provide 
canals but would also supply other public goods. We study defensive walls as one 
public good that is measurable in the archeological record. We record, for each city 
in our panel, whether it had a defensive wall in the periods of our main study period. 
From this dataset, we code an indicator equal to one if the nearest city to grid cell  
c  had a defensive wall. Using this indicator as our outcome variable in column 2 of 
Table 4 we find that a river shift is associated with an 11 percentage point increase 
in the probability of having a city wall, relative to a mean of 14 percent.48
46 This result is driven by the absence of states before and after treatment where rivers shift to, and our previ-
ous result that showed that states form where the river shifted away. Since cells that are part of a state that formed 
because of a river shifting away are more likely to be in the control group of a river shifting closer, we find a negative 
treatment effect.
47  Following Ur (2014), we argued that in practice governments played a coordinating role between various 
stakeholders in the canal projects. We return to this interpretation in our mechanisms section.
48 In the last  pretreatment period, only Abu Salabikh had a defensive wall. In our treatment period Abu Salabikh, 
Adab, Esnunna, Khafaji, Nippur, Tell Aqrab, Umma, Ur, and Uruk had defensive walls.
--- Page 28 ---
2534
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
Tribute and Government Organization: We have argued that part of a coopera-
tive explanation for the origins of the state is that individuals are willing to exchange 
resources for government services. The simplest way to measure tribute payment is 
an indicator equal to one if we have surviving cuneiform tablets in the nearest city to 
a grid cell. We do this because we discussed in Section III that most surviving cune-
iform tablets are records of tribute payment or redistribution. We validate this con-
clusion in Table RA29 of the Results Appendix, where we use the text of the tablets 
to validate that our indicator does indeed primarily measure tribute. We provide full 
details on how we processed the tablets data in Section 8 of the Data Appendix. We 
find that a river shift away leads to a 21 percentage point increase in the probability 
of tribute payment taking place, relative to a sample mean of 19 percent.
In Section I we discussed the organization of public good provision. One aspect 
of public good provision we highlight here is the central role of administrative build-
ings. Government activity was concentrated in palaces, temples and ziggurats. In 
Table 3 we used administrative buildings as part of our reconstruction of states. Here 
we use the total number of palaces, temples, and ziggurats in the city nearest to a 
Table 4—A River Shift Leads to Public Good Provision and Tribute
Public good provision 
(yes/no) Administration
Dependent variable: Canal Wall
Tribute
(yes/no)
N. admin.
build.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
River shift (yes/no) 0.12 0.11 0.21 0.44
(0.03) (0.04) (0.06) (0.15)
[0.02] [0.03] [0.10] [0.17]
p-value  pretrend 0.81 0.57 0.20 0.69
Mean dependent variable 0.28 0.14 0.19 0.70
Observations 4,320 4,424 4,424 4,424
Clusters 932 932 932 932
Period × archeological excavation Y Y Y Y
Period × rainfall Y Y Y Y
Period × temperature Y Y Y Y
Period × urban Y Y Y Y
Notes: All regressions are estimated using OLS. The  cross-sectional unit of observation is a 
5×5 kilometer grid cell. The  time series period is an archeological period. We describe peri-
odization in our Data Appendix Section 1.3. Canal (yes/no) is an indicator variable equal to 
one if there is a canal within five kilometers (distances measured from the cell centroid). Wall 
(yes/no) is an indicator variable equal to one if there is a defensive wall in the nearest city. 
Tribute (yes/no) is an indicator variable equal to one if a cuneiform tablet was excavated in 
the nearest city. No. of admin buildings is the sum of the number of palaces, the number of 
temples, and the number of ziggurats in the nearest city. River shift (yes/no) is an indica-
tor equal to one if the nearest river was within five kilometers in period  t − 1  and is further 
than five kilometers away in period  t  (distances measured from the cell centroid). All regres-
sions include period and grid cell fixed effects. Period × archeological excavation is a vec-
tor of period fixed effects interacted with indicators for each of the three main archeological 
surveys of settlement we use. These surveys are described and mapped in the Data Appendix 
Sections 1.2 and 4. Period × rainfall is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with average 
rainfall. Period × temperature is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with average tem-
perature. Period × urban is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with an indicator equal 
to one if a grid cell contained a city in the last  pre-period before treatment. Heteroskedasticity 
robust standard errors clustered at the grid cell level are in parentheses. Conley (1999) standard 
errors are in square brackets.
--- Page 29 ---
2535
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
grid cell as a measure of “state capacity.” We find that where a river shifts away the 
number of administrative buildings in the nearest city increases by 0.44, relative to 
a mean of 0.7.49
The fact that we observe states form, and these states both receive tribute and pro-
vide public goods from administrative buildings supports our claim that state form 
as a consequence of rivers shifting. The fact that states form where the river shifted 
away, rather than where the river shifted to, is consistent with public goods and taxes 
being cooperatively exchanged rather than taxes being extracted coercively. Before 
discussing the internal organization of the first states we discuss the generalizability 
of our findings beyond the Iraqi context.
VI. Generalizability
In this section we study generalizability of our findings so far, both over space 
and over time. We start from the observation that historically, state formation is rare 
(Scott 2017). This poses a problem for any theory of state formation because pur -
ported favorable conditions for state formation were ubiquitous. 50 In this section, 
we study conditions under which our main results hold. We show that relative to an 
outside option like migration to the rivers or nomadism, state formation may not 
be sufficiently appealing. It is important to emphasize that the results in this paper 
are about the formation of the first states. Once states have formed, naturally there 
are incentives to both facilitate cooperation and predate or extract. To study how 
our results extend over time we study subsequent river shifts that happen within the 
territory of existing states. We find that in response to later river shifts, public goods 
continue to be provided locally.
The Costs and Benefits of State Formation:  We start by splitting our sample by 
 cross-sectional costs and benefits of state formation and estimating heterogeneous 
treatment effects. Throughout, we use our indicator variable for whether a grid cell 
is under a state in our main study period as our outcome variable. Results are in 
Table 5. We provide the average effect in column 1 and pairs of subsequent columns 
report treated effects estimated in subsamples of our main dataset.
In panel A we focus on the social costs and benefits of state formation. In columns 
2 and 3 we split the sample by the median of the spatial lag of settlement  density 
in the last  pre-period before treatment (Anselin 2013). 51 We compute the spatial 
lag of settlement of grid cell  c  by summing settlement density in surrounding cells, 
down-weighting cells that are further away.52 We visualize these regressions in col-
umns 2 and 3 in panel B of Figure 5. The effect of river shifts on state formation 
49 For example, in the treatment period a new palace is built in Umma, Nippur, and Adab. Uruk had a palace and 
a ziggurat, and Ur had a ziggurat in the last  pre-period which survived into our treatment period. Tell Jemdet Nasr 
and Tell Uqair had a palace in the  pre-period which is no longer in use in the treatment period.
50 For example, conflict occurs far more frequently than state formation and some states form without any evi-
dence of conflict (Lowie 1927). Opportunities for productive cooperation to alleviate issues arising from opposing 
interests seem ubiquitous too.
51 The number of observations in each subsample are not exactly equal because we split before imposing the 
sample restrictions introduced in Section IV A.
52 We include the entire sample area in this calculation. Since grid cells further away are heavily down-weighted, 
results are virtually the same if we instead impose a fixed distance  cut-off.
--- Page 30 ---
2536
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
is concentrated where–before the shift–population density was higher. This is the 
same conclusion as we reached when we discussed our maps in Figure 4. In columns 
4 and 5 we instead measure whether settlement was aligned with the landscape gra-
dient before the river shifted. The gradient of the southern Iraqi plain slopes gently 
Table 5—Heterogeneous Effects: Costs and Benefits of State Formation
Dependent variable: Under city state (yes/no)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Panel A. Social returns and costs of canal building
Social returns Social costs
Population density Settl. aligned for canals
Sample: Full sample High Low Aligned Misaligned
River shift (yes/no) 0.14 0.18 0.03 0.22 −0.01
(0.04) (0.05) (0.02) (0.06) (0.03)
[0.03] [0.03] [0.03] [0.04] [0.02]
p-value Chow test coefficient equality 0.06 0.06 0.00 0.00
p-value  pretrend 0.23 0.98 0.12 0.42 0.49
Mean dependent variable 0.06 0.07 0.04 0.08 0.03
Observations 4,631 2,323 2,308 2,365 2,266
Clusters 932 465 467 477 455
Panel B. Geographic returns and costs of canal building
Geographic returns Geographic costs
Δ potential productivity Water flow nearest river
Sample: Full sample High Δ Low Δ Slow flow Fast flow
River shift (yes/no) 0.14 0.16 −0.05 0.10 0.03
(0.04) (0.05) (0.02) (0.05) (0.06)
p-value Chow test coefficient equality 0.00 0.00 0.14 0.14
p-value  pretrend 0.23 0.88 0.62 0.27 0.32
Mean dependent variable 0.06 0.07 0.04 0.08 0.02
Observations 4,631 2,319 2,311 2,775 1,856
Clusters 932 465 467 555 377
Covariates (all regressions):
Period × archeological excavation Y Y Y Y Y
Period × rainfall Y Y Y Y Y
Period × temperature Y Y Y Y Y
Period × urban Y Y Y Y Y
Notes: All regressions are estimated using OLS. All estimated coefficients are standardized. The  cross-sectional unit 
of observation is a 5×5 kilometer grid cell. The  time series period is an archeological period. We describe period-
ization in our Data Appendix Section 1.3. Under city state (yes/no) is an indicator equal to one if the grid cell is 
part of a state. We split the sample by four indicator variables, measuring social returns, social costs, geographical 
returns, and geographic costs. Change in potential productivity returns to irrigation is an indicator equal to one if 
the difference between the suitability of the soil for irrigated and rainfed cultivation of barley is above its median. 
Slow water flow is an indicator equal to one if the nearest river is the slow-flowing Euphrates, or the smaller Diyala 
river, and zero if the nearest river is the fast-flowing Tigris. Slower flowing rivers are easier to irrigate from as they 
cut less deep into the landscape. High settlement density area is an indicator equal to one if the spatial lag of the 
number of settlements in period    t − 1  is above its median. Settlement misaligned for canals is an indicator equal 
to one if the number of settlements aligned suitably for canal construction is lower than the number of settlements 
that are misaligned in period   t − 1 . River shift (yes/no) is an indicator equal to one if the nearest river was within 
five kilometers in period  t − 1  and is further than five kilometers away in period  t  (distances measured from the cell 
centroid). All regressions include period and grid cell fixed effects. Period × archeological excavation is a vector 
of period fixed effects interacted with indicators for each of the three main archeological surveys of settlement we 
use. These surveys are described and mapped in Data Appendix Sections 1.2 and 4. Period × rainfall is a vector of 
period fixed effects interacted with average rainfall. Period × temperature is a vector of period fixed effects inter -
acted with average temperature. Period × urban is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with an indicator equal 
to one if a grid cell contained a city in the last  pre-period before treatment. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors 
clustered at the grid cell level are in parentheses. Conley (1999) standard errors are in square brackets.
--- Page 31 ---
2537
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
downward from  northwest-west to  southeast-east. This means a single canal irri-
gates several settlements if they are aligned  north-south and these settlements will 
need to coordinate. If, instead, settlements are aligned  east-west, each settlement 
will require a separate canal. For each grid cell, we compute an indicator equal to 
one if the count of settlements in cells to the north or south of a grid cell is smaller 
than the count of settlements to the east or west. If equal to one, then a grid cell is 
“misaligned.” We find that states form where villages are aligned for irrigation, and 
where there are, therefore, benefits to coordination. For misaligned villages, we find 
no treatment effect of a river shift.
In panel B of Table 5 we focus on the geographical costs and benefits of forming 
a state. We split the sample in two ways. First, we split by the potential agricultural 
return to canal irrigation: the difference of irrigated to rainfed potential productiv-
ity of the soil. 53 A larger difference can be interpreted as a rate of return on canal 
investment for fixed inputs. We split the sample by its median, and report results 
in columns 2 and 3. Columns 4 and 5 instead split by whether a grid cell is closest 
to the Euphrates or the Tigris. 54 The Tigris is fast flowing and cuts deep into the 
desert making it relatively difficult to irrigate from. The Euphrates is slow moving, 
cuts less deep, and is therefore easier to irrigate from (Adams 1981). We find that 
the probability that a state is formed is higher if potential productivity is higher and 
where water for irrigation is easier to access.
These results, combined with the observation that river shifts are large shocks, pro-
vide insight into why, despite abundant collective opportunities for coordination, state 
formation is relatively rare in history. The simplest response to a river shifting away 
is to move away. If people are well positioned to coordinate, they may form a state.
Results Using a Longer Panel:  Our main results show that states form where 
rivers shift away. Importantly, our main results pertain to the formation of the first 
states in history. It is clear however that once a government is in place, there are 
incentives to coordinate as well as predate.55 This is especially the case since typi-
cally some enforcement power will have to be ceded to the state. In this section we 
extend our panel to cover all six river shifts that take place within our sample area. 
The objective of this section is to provide tentative evidence whether our results 
so far extend over time. To study the effect of river shifts under the later states and 
empires, we extend our panel to cover 5000BCE until 1950CE. After the formation 
of the first states five more river shifts take place within our sample area. We discuss 
the historical context for each shift in Section 2 of our Data Appendix, and we visu-
alize each shift in our Atlas Appendix, Figures AA5 to AA11.56
All river shifts after our main study period take place within the territory of sev-
eral smaller states or one large, consolidated state. This means that we can study 
53 These data come from the Food and Agricultural Organization, and we describe the data in detail in Section 3 
of the Data Appendix.
54 We group the smaller Diyala river that comes down from the Zagros mountains with the Euphrates.
55 Historians do indeed point to the disappearance of assemblies as consensual organs of decision making 
(Bailkey 1967) and the a more central role of slavery (Scott 2017) from about 2000BCE.
56 River shift 2 in Figure 2, happened around 2450BCE in the middle of the Early Dynastic III period. This 
period was characterized by military competition between city states and, towards the end of the period, by the 
first attempts of political centralization across the sample area. We visualize this shift in Figure AA5 of our Atlas 
Appendix. Especially in the north, the Euphrates and Tigris separated more clearly in two distinct watercourses 
--- Page 32 ---
2538
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
the responsiveness of governments in Iraq to increased returns to coordination. It 
also means we can for subsequent river shifts no longer study whether a grid cell 
is part of a state. Instead, we study the effects of a river shifting away on canal 
construction.57
We indicate the longer period that this exercise covers as our “extended study 
period” in Figure  2. We estimate the effect of all six river shifts that take place 
within our sample area in a standard panel  difference-in-differences model, which 
we estimate using OLS.58
We report results in Table  6. In column 1 we use our full panel, covering 
5000BCE–1950CE. In the first row we report the estimated effect of a river shifting 
away, across all six shifts. We find that when a river shifts away, the probability of 
having a canal increases by 11 percentage points, or about one-quarter of the full 
sample mean. The first two river shifts occurred when there were either no states that 
projected authority beyond a city and its immediate surroundings (this is our main 
study period, indicated by “1” in Figure 2), or when there were states and stateless 
areas (indicated by “2” in Figure 2). Each subsequent shift took place after our sam-
ple area was mostly or entirely governed by states. We indicate all subsequent shifts 
as well as the fraction of our sample area that is governed by a state in Figure 2. In 
columns 2 and 3 we break up our panel in two  sub-panels, the first covering the first 
two shifts and the second covering the four subsequent shifts. In both subsamples 
 starting their slow movement towards the fringes of the plain. River shift 3 in Figure 2 took place during Hammurabi’s 
reign, around 1750BCE, a period that marked a more stable transition from the coexistence of regional powers to 
firmer centralization across the sample area. The Euphrates further shifted from the center of the plain westward. 
We visualize this shift in the Atlas Appendix, Figure AA6. River shift 4 in Figure 2 took place around 1000BCE, at 
the beginning of the Middle Babylonian period, which was characterized by continuous foreign invasions and polit-
ical instability across the sample area. Although formally under the centralized control of Babylon, southern Iraq 
was again split into different areas of political influence. The shift marked the definitive separation of the courses of 
the Tigris and the Euphrates in the sample area, which moved further to the east and west, respectively. We visualize 
the new river equilibrium in Figure AA7 of the Atlas Appendix. River shift 5 in Figure 2 happened around 700BCE 
between the end of the  neo-Assyrian and the beginning of the  neo-Babylonian period. The transition between the 
two periods marked the end of a period characterized by foreign occupation and instability to a new era of strong 
political centralization in southern Iraq. The shift, which we visualize in Figure AA8 of the Atlas Appendix led to 
the movement of the Euphrates roughly to its current bed. After the 700BCE shift, the riverine system substantially 
stabilized, with only smaller adjustments to the network. The last shift we record, number (6) in Figure 2, only led 
to the disappearance of a secondary branch of the Euphrates and to the adjustment of the course of the Diyala river. 
These adjustments happened around 450CE, in the middle of the Sassanian period, which was characterized by 
low state presence that followed the military confrontation of the Parthian and Sassanian empires in the area. We 
visualize the shift in Figure AA9 of our Atlas Appendix.
57 We map settlement, cities, rivers, canals, for each archeological period spanning 5000BCE until 1950CE in 
our Atlas Appendix.
58 The regression equation takes the following form:
(2)   Y ct   = β treate d ct   +  ρ c   +  γ t   +  υ ct   +  ε ct   .
Here   Y ct    is an indicator equal to one if grid cell  c  in period  t  was on a canal.  treate d ct    is an indicator equal to one if 
grid cell  c  in period  t  is treated. We define treatment as before: a grid cell is treated if the nearest river was within 
five kilometers in  t − 1 , and the nearest river is more than five kilometers away in period  t . Our coefficient of inter-
est is  β . We include grid cell fixed effects   ρ c   , and period fixed effects   γ t   . As before,   υ ct    is a vector of period fixed 
effects interacted with  time-invariant covariates. We include covariates for the three large archeological survey areas 
covered by the Chicago Oriental Institute which we describe in our Data Appendix Section 1.2, rainfall, tempera-
ture, and an indicator equal to one if a grid cell was urban in the last  pre-period before the first river shift.   ε ct    is a 
standard error, clustered at the grid cell level. As before, we report Conley standard errors throughout. In the Results 
Appendix, Tables RA33 and RA34, we show results using a stacked panel model, and using De Chaisemartin and 
d’Haultfoeuille (2020)’s estimator. Results are very similar. 
--- Page 33 ---
2539
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
we find that a river shifting away leads to public good provision, indicating some 
degree of reciprocity between state and society throughout Iraqi history.
Our main results show that when a river shifts away, new states form. In Section I 
we argued the formation of states was a social adaptation to the larger scale at 
which coordination was now necessary. In response, existing social arrangements 
that operated within lineages were scaled up to operate across lineages. The gov-
ernment was essentially a ruling lineage that coordinated activities. In the next 
section, we substantiate this interpretation using evidence from surviving govern-
ment records.
VII. The Internal Organization of the State
In this section, we revisit our dataset of 5,885 transliterated cuneiform tablets to 
study the internal organization of the first states. For our main study period, these 
tablets are written in Sumerian. Sumerian has been deciphered, and we can there-
fore use a standard Sumerian dictionary to track the frequency of the use of terms 
in these tablets. Key to this exercise is that the view among Assyriologists is that 
most, if not all, surviving tablets from our main study period were produced by gov-
ernment scribes and were state administrative records (Englund 2011; Nissen 1993; 
Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993; Nissen 1986). Since we know where each 
tablet was found, and all tablets have been dated, we can subset to tablets within our 
sample area and study period.
Table 6—Heterogeneous Effects: Canal Construction over Time
Dependent variable: Canal (yes/no)
Period:  5000BCE–1950CE  5000BCE–2350BCE  2350BCE–1950CE
State: All First states Subsequent states
(1) (2) (3)
River shift (yes/no) 0.11 0.15 0.10
(0.02) (0.03) (0.02)
[0.02] [0.02] [0.02]
Mean dependent variable 0.40 0.20 0.51
Observations 27,106 9,718 17,388
Clusters 1,094 1,094 1,094
Period × archeological excavation Y Y Y
Period × rainfall Y Y Y
Period × temperature Y Y Y
Period × urban Y Y Y
Notes: All regressions are estimated using OLS. The  cross-sectional unit of observation is a 5×5 kilometer grid 
cell. The  time series period is an archeological period. We describe periodization in our Data Appendix Section 1.3. 
Canal (yes/no) is an indicator variable equal to one if there is a canal within five kilometers (distances measured 
from the cell centroid). River shift (yes/no) is an indicator equal to one if the nearest river was within five kilome-
ters in period   t − 1  and is further than five kilometers away in period  t  (distances measured from the cell centroid). 
All regressions include period and grid cell fixed effects. Period × archeological excavation is a vector of period 
fixed effects interacted with indicators for each of the three main archeological surveys of settlement we use. These 
surveys are described and mapped in the Data Appendix Sections 1.2 and 4. Period × rainfall is a vector of period 
fixed effects interacted with average rainfall. Period × temperature is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with 
average temperature. Period × urban is a vector of period fixed effects interacted with an indicator equal to one if a 
grid cell contained a city in the last  pre-period before the first river shift. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors 
clustered at the grid cell level are in parentheses. Conley (1999) standard errors are in square brackets. 
--- Page 34 ---
2540
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
We start with the word for lineage head, lugal. It literally translates as “big” (gal) 
“man” (lu) and indicated the head of a household and a lineage. As the first states 
appeared, the term came to define the head of the ruling lineage of a (city) state (Ur 
2014; Emberling 2015).59 Second, we also focus on the term gal, which translated 
literally means “great, senior,” and by extension “chief”—both as an adjective and 
a noun (Garfinkle 2021). The gal designated a generic lineage leader (or chief) 
although likely of inferior rank compared to the lugal. For both lugal and gal we 
record the fraction of tablets that mention either. In addition, we record the fraction 
of tablets that mention canals and tribute, both to validate our approach to using 
these tablets as well as an additional way to measure cooperation. A complication 
for this approach is that Sumerian uses many variations of individual terms in differ-
ent contexts. In Section 8.2 of the Data Appendix, we discuss how we use Sumerian 
keywords to search for these terms in more detail.
We present results in two ways. In Figure 6 we plot the fraction of tablets contain-
ing a particular term before and after the river shift that took place in our main study 
period. Panel A plots lugal and then gal, and panel B plots canal and then tribute. We 
observe that “lugal” appears after treatment and does not appear at all before the for-
mation of the new states we found in Section V . The more general “gal” or “chief” 
appears in tablets both before and after the shift. However, the fraction of tablets that 
mentions “gal” increases by about 40 percent after the river shift. Canals are men-
tioned at low rates before the river shift and increase after. Tribute is not mentioned 
at all before the river shift and is mentioned after, albeit at low rates as well.
Because we assigned each tablet to the city where it was found, we can use the 
fraction of tablets in a regression framework too. We  reestimate equation (1) using 
the fraction of tablets mentioning a particular term in the city nearest to a grid cell 
in a period. Results are reported in Tables RA31 and RA32 in the Results Appendix. 
We prefer the bar graphs because most of the variation in the fraction of tablets 
mentioning a term comes from having a tablet, rather than from the intensive mar -
gin of the fraction of tablets mentioning a certain term. Nevertheless, we can com-
pare point estimates across columns, and find that, relative to the sample mean, the 
effects for “lugal” and canals are the strongest.
Taken together, the evidence from our cuneiform tablets is in line with the inter-
pretation of the organization of the state we documented in Section I. The formation 
of the state was an extension of  preexisting social structures to take on new tasks.
VIII. Conclusion
In this paper we test between cooperative and extractive theories of the origins of 
states and governments. To test between these theories, we focus on river shifts in 
southern Iraq as natural experiments.
We hypothesized that such shifts create a coordination problem because private 
irrigation from the river now needs to be replaced by public canals. Importantly, 
because rivers do not shift in parallel, but break through their levees at a point and 
59 As such, lugal is somewhat anachronistically translated as “king.” While anachronistic, the term had a secular 
connotation compared to other traditional religious titles, such as en and ensi. These have at times been interpreted 
as “ruler,” but these titles had a stronger religious connotation (Marchesi and Marchetti 2011).
--- Page 35 ---
2541
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
find a new course in the otherwise almost flat southern Iraqi plain, some farmers can 
still irrigate from the river whereas others cannot. This natural experiment maps onto 
cooperative and extractive theories of the state in the following way. If it was the 
case that states form to manage extraction (see e.g., Engels 1878), then we expect 
states to form where the rivers are. If, instead, states form to manage problems that 
individuals cannot solve privately (see, e.g., Locke 1689 and Baumol 1952) then we 
expect to see states form where the river shifted away.
We constructed a panel of shifting rivers, states, public good provision, and 
records of tribute payments for southern Iraq spanning 3900BCE–2700BCE. Our 
main results estimate the effect the first river shift which occurred around 2850BCE. 
Where rivers shift away states form, public goods—and in particular canals—are 
provided, and tribute is paid. We then use evidence from cuneiform tablets to bol-
ster our interpretation of the internal organization of these first states. The first 
states were in essence  scaled-up versions of the social structure that existed within 
extended kinship groups, called lineages.
Figure 6. Text Analysis of Cuneiform Tablets
Notes: This figure provides four comparisons of the fraction of cuneiform tablets that contain specific terms, before 
and after the first river shift, indicated as shift 1 in Figure 2. In panel A we plot the fraction of tablets that contain 
the word lugal, which translates as “lineage head” and was used for the leader of the ruling lineage. gal which des-
ignated a generic lineage leader (or chief) although likely of inferior rank compared to the lugal. Since cuneiform 
tablets are largely government records, we observe that both mentions of state leaders and local leaders increase as 
states form. We interpret this finding in Section VII. In panel B we provide additional evidence for the development 
of a social contract. We plot the fraction of tablets that mention canals and tribute. We provide the list of Sumerian 
terms we use to code these categories in the Data Appendix Section 8.2. We observe that both the frequency of men-
tions of canals and tribute go up as states form.
Canals Tribute
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04Fraction of cuneiform tablets that mention: 
Lineage head Chief
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25Fraction of cuneiform tablets that mention: 
Panel A. Organization of government Panel B. Canals and tribute
Post-treatment: 
No Yes
Post-treatment: 
No Yes
--- Page 36 ---
2542
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise? Democ-
racy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (4): 
1167–99. 
Adams, Robert M. 1965. Land Behind Baghdad: A History of Settlement on the Diyala Plains. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press. 
Adams, Robert M. 1981. Heartland of Cities: Surveys of Ancient Settlement and Land Use on the Cen-
tral Floodplain of the Euphrates. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Adams, Robert M., and Hans J. Nissen. 1972. The Uruk Countryside: The Natural Setting of Urban 
Societies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Algaze, Guillermo. 2008. Ancient Mesopotamia at the Dawn of Civilization: The Evolution of an 
Urban Landscape. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Allen, Robert C. 1997. “Agriculture and the Origins of the State in Ancient Egypt.” Explorations in 
Economic History 34 (2): 135–54. 
Allen, Robert C. 2022. From Foraging to the First States: An Economic History. Cambridge Univer-
sity, Ellen McArthur Lectures.
Allen, Robert C., Mattia Bertazzini, and Leander Heldring. 2023. “Replication Data for The Eco-
nomic Origins of Government.” American Economic Association [Publisher], Inter-university Con-
sortium for Political and Social Research [Distributor]. https://doi.org/10.3886/184167EV1.
Allen, Robert C., and Leander Heldring. 2022. “The Collapse of Civilization in Southern Mesopota-
mia.” Cliometrica 16 (2): 369–404.
Ang, James B. 2015. “What Drives the Historical Formation and Persistent Development of Territorial 
States?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1134–75. 
Anselin, L. 2013. Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models, V ol. 4. New York, NY: Springer Sci-
ence.
Bagg, Ariel M. 2012. “Irrigation.” In A Companion to the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East, edited 
by D. Potts, 261–78. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Bailkey, Nels. 1967. “Early Mesopotamian Constitutional Development.” American Historical 
Review 72 (4): 1211–36. 
Bakker, Jan David, Stephan Maurer, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Ferdinand Rauch. 2021. “Of Mice 
and Merchants: Trade and Growth in the Iron Age.” Review of Economics and Statistics 103 (4): 
652–65.
Barjamovic, Gojko, Thomas Chaney, Kerem Cos ¸ar, and Ali Hortaçsu. 2019. “Trade, Merchants, and 
the Lost Cities of the Bronze Age.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3): 1455–1503. 
Bator, F. M. 1958. “The Anatomy of Market Failure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 72 (3): 351–79. 
Baumol, William. 1952. Welfare Economics and the Theory of the State. London: Longmans Green. 
Benati, Giacomo, and Carmine Guerriero. 2022. “The Origins of the State: Technology, Cooperation 
and Institutions.” Journal of Institutional Economics 18 (1): 29–43. 
Benati, Giacomo, Carmine Guerriero, and Federico Zaina. 2022. “The Origins of Political Institutions 
and Property Rights.” Journal of Comparative Economics 50 (4): 946–68. 
Benco, Nancy L. 1992. “Manufacture and Use of Clay Sickles from the Uruk Mound, Abu Salabikh, 
Iraq.” Paléorient 18 (1): 119–34. 
Bentzen, Jeanet S., Nicolai Kaarsen, and Asger M. Wingender. 2017. “Irrigation and Autocracy.” Jour-
nal of the European Economic Association 15 (1): 1–53. 
Borcan, Oana, Ola Olsson, and Louis Putterman. 2021. “Transition to Agriculture and First State Pres-
ence: A Global Analysis.” Explorations in Economic History 82: 101404. 
Boserup, Ester. 2011. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarin Change 
under Population Pressure. New York, NY: Earthscan. 
Bramanti, A. 2020. “Management of Resources and Taxation in the Early Dynastic and Sargonic Peri-
ods.” In Economic Complexity in the Ancient Near East: Management of Resources and Taxa-
tion (Third-Second Millenium BC, edited by Jana Myná  r ̌   ová and Sergio Alivernini, 25–36. Prague: 
Charles University. 
Brayshaw, David J., Claire M. Rambeau, and Samuel J. Smith. 2011. “Changes in Mediterranean Cli-
mate during the Holocene: Insights from Global and Regional Climate Modelling.” Holocene 21 
(1): 15–31. 
Bryce, Trevor. 2009. The Routledge Handbook of the Peoples and Places of Ancient Western Asia: The 
Near East from the Early Bronze Age to the Fall of the Persian Empire. London: Routledge. 
--- Page 37 ---
2543
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
Carneiro, Robert L. 1970. “A Theory of the Origin of the State: Traditional Theories of State Ori-
gins are Considered and Rejected in Favor of a New Ecological Hypothesis.” Science 169 (3947): 
733–38. 
Chaney, Eric. 2013. “Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion, and Political Power.” Economet-
rica 81 (5): 2033–53. 
Childe, V . Gordon. 1950. “The Urban Revolution.” Town Planning Review 21 (1): 3–17. 
Cole, S. W., and H. Gasche. 1998. “Second- and first-millennium BC rivers in northern Babylonia.” In 
Changing Watercourses in Babylonia, edited by Hermann Gasche and Michel Tanret, 1–64. Ghent: 
University of Ghent. 
Conley, T. G. 1999. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of Econometrics 92 
(1): 1–45. 
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pablo Hernández, and Sebastián Mazzuca. 2022. “The Paradox of Civilization: Prein-
stitutional Sources of Security and Prosperity.” American Political Science Review 116 (1): 213–30. 
De  Chaisemartin, Clement, and Xavier  d’Haultfoeuille. 2020. “Two-Way Fixed Effects Estimators 
with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects.” American Economic Review 110 (9): 2964–96. 
Diamond, Jared M. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel: A Short History of Everybody for the Last 13,000 
Years. New York: Random House. 
Dow, Gregory K., and Clyde G. Reed. 2013. “The Origins of Inequality: Insiders, Outsiders, Elites, and 
Commoners.” Journal of Political Economy 121 (3): 609–41. 
Emberling, Geoff. 2015. “Mesopotamian Cities and Urban Process, 3500–1600 BCE.” In The Cam-
bridge World History, Volume III: Early Cities in Comparative Perspective, 4000 BCE-1200 CE, 
edited by Norman Yoffee, 253–78. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Engels, Frederick. 1934. Herr Eugen Duhring’s Revolution in Science. New York: International Pub-
lishers, (Orig. pub. 1878). 
Englund, Robert K. 2011. “Accounting in Proto-Cuneiform.” In The Oxford Handbook of Cuneiform 
Culture, edited by Karen Radner and Eleanor Robson, 32–50. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Fenske, James. 2014. “Ecology, Trade, and States in Pre-Colonial Africa.” Journal of the European 
Economic Association 12 (3): 612–40. 
Finné, Martin, Karin Holmgren, Hanna S. Sundqvist, Erika Weiberg, and Michael Lindblom. 2011. 
“Climate in the Eastern Mediterranean, and Adjacent Regions, During the Past 6000 Years–A 
Review.” Journal of Archaeological Science 38 (12): 3153–73. 
Fried, M. H. 1978. “The State, the Chicken, and the Egg: or, What Came First.” In Origins of the State: 
The Anthropology of Political Evolution, edited by Ronald Cohen and Elman R. Service, 35–47. 
Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues. 
Garfinkle, Steven. 2021. “The Third Dynasty of Ur and the Limits of State Power in Early Mesopo-
tamia.” In From the 21st Century BC to the 21st Century AD, edited by Steven J. Garfinkle and 
Manuel Molina, 153–68. University Park, PA: Penn State University Press. 
Gibson, M. 1992. “The Origin and Development of Sumerian Civilization and its Relation to Environ-
ment.” In Nature and Humankind in the Age of Environmental Crisis, edited by Ito Shuntaro and 
Yasuda Yoshinori, 1–27. Kyoto, Japan: International Research Center for Japanese Studies. 
Gruber, J. W. 1948. “Irrigation and Land Use in Ancient Mesopotamia.” Agricultural History 22 (2): 
69–77. 
Heinrich, Ernst. 1982. Die Tempel und Heiligtümer im alten Mesopotamien: Typologie, Morphologie 
und Geschichte. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
Heinrich, Ernst. 1984. Die Paläste im alten Mesopotamien. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
Hewett, Zarina, Michelle de Gruchy, Daniel Hill, and Dan Lawrence. 2022. “Raincheck: A New Dia-
chronic Series of Rainfall Maps for Southwest Asia over the Holocene.” Levant 54: 5–28. 
Hobbes, Thomas. 1980. Leviathan. Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Orig. pub. 1651). 
Hornbeck, Richard, and Suresh Naidu. 2014. “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and Eco-
nomic Development in the American South.” American Economic Review 104 (3): 963–90. 
Jacobsen, Thorkild. 1943. “Primitive Democracy in Ancient Mesopotamia.” Journal of Near Eastern 
Studies 2 (3): 159–72. 
Lafont, Bertrand, Aline Tenu, Francis Joannès, and Philippe Clancier. 2017. La Mésopotamie. De Gil-
gamesh à Artaban 3300-120 av. J.-C. Paris: Belin. 
Lessnoff, Michael H. 1986. Social Contract. London: Macmillan International Higher Education. 
Locke, John. 1689. Second Treatise of Government: An Essay Concerning the True Original, Extent 
and End of Civil Government. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 1982.
Lowie, Robert. 1927. The Origins of the State. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company. 
Marchesi, Gianni, and Nicolò Marchetti. 2011. Royal Statuary of Early Dynastic Mesopotamia. Uni-
versity Park, PA: Eisenbrauns. 
--- Page 38 ---
2544
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW OCTOBER 2023
Mayoral, Laura, and Ola Olsson. 2019. “Pharaoh’s Cage: Environmental Circumscription and Appro-
priability in Early State Development.” Unpublished. 
Mayshar, Joram, Omer Moav, and Luigi Pascali. 2022. “The Origin of the State: Land Productivity or 
Appropriability?” Journal of Political Economy 130 (4): 1091–1144. 
Meyers, Eric. 1997. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Archaeology in the Near East. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
Morony, M. G. 1987. “In the City without Watchdogs the Fox is the Overseer: Issues and Problems in 
the Study of Bureaucracy.” In The Organization of Power Aspects of Bureaucracy in the Ancient 
Near East, edited by McGuire Gibson and Robert D. Biggs, 7–18. Chicago: The Oriental Institute 
of the University of Chicago. 
Nissen, Hans J. 1993. “The Context of the Emergence of Writing in Mesopotamia and Iran.” In Early 
Mesopotamia and Iran: Contact and Conflict 3500-1600 BC: Proceedings of a Seminar in Memory 
of Vladimir G. Lukonin, edited by John Curtis, 54–71. London: British Museum Press. 
Nissen, Hans J. 1986. “The Archaic Texts from Uruk.” World Archaeology 17 (3): 317–34. 
Nissen, Hans J. 1988. The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000-2000 B.C. Chicago: Chicago 
University Press. 
Nissen, Hans J., Peter Damerow, and Robert K. Englund. 1993. Archaic Bookkeeping: Early Writing 
and Techniques of the Economic Administration in the Ancient Near East. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
North, Douglass C. 1979. “A Framework for Analyzing the State in Economic History.” Explorations 
in Economic History 16 (3): 249–59. 
Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Olson, Mancur. 1993. “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development.” American Political Science 
Review 87 (3): 567–76. 
Oppenheimer, Franz. 1922. The State: Its History and Development Viewed Sociologically. New York, 
NY: Vanguard Press. 
Persson, Torsten, Gerard  Roland, and Guido  Tabellini. 2000. “Comparative Politics and Public 
Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (6): 1121–61. 
Pigou, Arthur Cecil. 1924. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan. 
Pollock, Susan. 1999. Ancient Mesopotamia: The Eden That Never Was. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Postgate, Nicholas. 2017. Early Mesopotamia: Society and Economy at the Dawn of History. Abing-
don: Taylor and Francis.
Pournelle, Jennifer. 2003. Marshland of Cities: Deltaic Landscapes and the Evolutions of Early Mes-
opotamian Civilization. PhD diss. Yale University. 
Richardson, Seth. 2012. “Early Mesopotamia: The Presumptive State.” Past & Present 215 (1): 3–49. 
Roaf, Michael. 1990. Cultural Atlas of Mesopotamia and the Ancient Near East. New York, NY: Facts 
on File Inc. 
Rost, Stephanie. 2017. “Water Management in Mesopotamia from the Sixth till the First Millennium 
BC.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water 4 (5): e1230. 
Rost, Stephanie, and G. Selz. 2011. “Irrigation Management in the Ur III Period: A Reconsideration 
Based on a Case Study of the Maintenance of the íd-Nina-šè-du Canal of the Province Lagaš.” Die 
empirische Dimension altorientalischer Forschungen 6: 211–269. 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 1839. Le Contrat Social, ou, Principes du droit politique. Paris: P. Pourrat 
Frères. (Orig. pub. 1762).
Sahlins, Marshall, and Elman  R. Service. 1960. Evolution and Culture. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press.
Samuelson, Pickhardt A. 1954. “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 28 (4): 387–89. 
Sánchez De La Sierra, R. 2020. “On the Origins of the State: Stationary Bandits and Taxation in East-
ern Congo.” Journal of Political Economy 128 (1): 32–74. 
Schönholzer, David. 2017. “The Origin of the State: Incentive Compatible Extraction under Environ-
mental Circumscription.” Unpublished. 
Schrakamp, Ingo. 2018. “Irrigation in 3rd millennium Southern Mesopotamia: cuneiform evidence 
from the Early Dynastic IIIb city-state of Lagash (2475–2315 BC).” In Water Management in 
Ancient Civilizations, edited by Jonas Berking, 117–95. Berlin: Edition Topoi. 
Scott, James C. 2017. Against the Grain: A Deep History of the Earliest States. New Haven: New 
Haven: Yale University Press. 
Service, Elman R. 1962. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary Perspective. New York: Ran-
dom House.
--- Page 39 ---
2545
ALLEN ET AL.: THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF GOVERNMENTVOL. 113 NO. 10
Service, Elman R. 1978. “Classical and Modern Theories of the Origins of Government.” In Origins of 
the State: The Anthropology of Political Evolution, edited by R. Cohen and E. R. Service, 21–34. 
Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues. 
Soroush, Mehrnoush, and Lee  Mordechai. 2018. “Adaptation to Short-Term Cataclysmic Events: 
Flooding in Premodern Riverine Societies.” Human Ecology 46 (3): 349–61. 
Tilly, Charles. 1992. Coercion, Capital, and European States, A.D. 990-1992. Cambridge, MA: Black-
well. 
Ur, Jason. 2014. “Households and the Emergence of Cities in Ancient Mesopotamia.” Cambridge 
Archaeological Journal 24 (2): 249–68. 
van de Mieroop, M. 1999. “The Government of an Ancient Mesopotamian City: what we know and why 
we know so little.” In Priests and Officials in the Ancient Near East, edited by Kazuko Watanabe, 
139–61. Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag C. Winter. 
Weber, Max. 1978. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. Berkeley, CA: Univer-
sity of California Press. 
Wilkinson, John Craven. 1977. Water and Tribal Settlement in South-East Arabia. A Study of the Aflaj 
of Oman. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wittfogel, Karl A. 1976. Oriental Despotism. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Wright, Henry T., and Gregory A. Johnson. 1975. “Population, Exchange, and Early State Formation 
in Southwestern Iran.” American Anthropologist 77 (2): 267–89.
--- Page 40 ---
This article has been cited by:
1. Robert C. Allen. 202⒋ The Neolithic Revolution in the Middle East. The Economic History Review
77:4, 1154-119⒍ [Crossref]
2. Eric Edwards, Leslie Sanchez, Sheetal Sekhri. 202⒋ The Economics of Drought. Annual Review of
Resource Economics 16:1, 105-12⒋ [Crossref]
⒊ Michael Callen, Saad Gulzar, Arman Rezaee, Jacob N. Shapiro. 202⒋ Extending the formal state: the
case of Pakistan's Frontier Crimes Regulation. Economica 91:363, 701-7⒙ [Crossref]
⒋ Дмитрий Алексеевич Литвинов. 202⒋ Показатели результативности руководителя-
лидера в сфере государственного и муниципального управления. Известия
Дальневосточного федерального университета. Экономика и управление :1, 40-4⒐ [Crossref]
⒌ Laura Mayoral, Ola Olsson. 202⒋ Floods, droughts, and environmental circumscription in early state
development: the case of ancient Egypt. Journal of Economic Growth 80. . [Crossref]
⒍ Sergio Cesaratto. 202⒋ Three approaches to institutions in economic analysis: Polanyi, North and
the surplus approach’s third way. Economia Politica 41:1, 267-29⒊ [Crossref]
⒎ Weǌian He, Xiaodong Wang, Miao Miao. 202⒋ Network infrastructure and corporate environmental
performance: Empirical evidence from “Broadband China”. Energy Economics 131, 10739⒊ [Crossref]
⒏ Coen N. Teulings, Bas J.P. van Bavel, Bram Van Besouw. 202⒋ The Emergence of Government as
Organized Violence-cum-robbery. SSRN Electronic Journal 102. . [Crossref]
⒐ Desiree Desierto, Mark Koyama. 202⒋ Institutional Change. SSRN Electronic Journal 31. . [Crossref]
⒑ Leonardo Ridolfi. Historical Datasets 2751-278⒌ [Crossref]
⒒ Alireza Naghavi, Mohsen Shaeyan. 202⒋ Qanats. SSRN Electronic Journal 803. . [Crossref]
⒓ Patrick Fitzsimmons. 202⒋ Blood and Iron: Political Fragmentation in the Ancient Eastern
Mediterranean. SSRN Electronic Journal 113. . [Crossref]
⒔ Leonardo Ridolfi. Historical Datasets 1-3⒌ [Crossref]
⒕ Shuo Chen, Xinyu Fan, YIN YANFEI. 202⒊ Deluge and the Rise of Civilizations: From the Neolithic
to Early States. SSRN Electronic Journal 71. . [Crossref]
⒖ Giacomo Benati, Carmine Guerriero. 2022. The Origins of Culture. SSRN Electronic Journal 31. .
[Crossref]