
--- Page 1 ---
Give to AgEcon Search
The World’s Largest Open Access Agricultural & Applied Economics Digital Library
This document is discoverable and free to researchers across the 
globe due to the work of AgEcon Search.
Help ensure our sustainability.
AgEcon Search
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu
aesearch@umn.edu
Papers downloaded from AgEcon Search may be used for non-commercial purposes and personal study only. 
No other use, including posting to another Internet site, is permitted without permission from the copyright 
owner (not AgEcon Search), or as allowed under the provisions of Fair Use, U.S. Copyright Act, Title 17 U.S.C.
No endorsement of AgEcon Search or its fundraising activities by the author(s) of the following work or their 
employer(s) is intended or implied.
--- Page 2 ---
378.794
G43455
WP-429
DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNIVERSHY OF CALIFORNIA
Working Paper No. 429
A STUDY IN RESISTANCE TO INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE:
THE LOST GAME OF LATIN AMERICAN LAND REFORM
by
Alain de Janvry and Elisabeth Sadoulet
WAITE MEMORIAL BOOK COLLECTION
DEPARTMEN1 OF AGRICULTURAL AND APPLIED. ECONOMICS
232 CLASSROOM OFFICE BLDG.
1994 BUFORD AVENUE, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA
ST. PAUL, MINNESOTA 55108
California Agricultural Experiment Station
Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics
December 1986

--- Page 3 ---

--- Page 4 ---
Pt STUDY IN RESISTANCE TO INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE:
THE LOST GAME OF LATIN AMERICAN LAND REFORM
by
Alain de Janvry and Elisabeth Sadoulet
WAITE MEMORIAL BOOK COLLECTION
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL AND APPLIED ECONOMICS
232 CLASSROOM OFFICE BLDG.
1994 BUEORD AVENUE, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA
ST. PAUL, MINNESOTA 55108
Paper presented at the Conference on "The Role of Institutions in Economic
Development," Cornell University, New York, November 14 and 15, 1986. We are
grateful to Nancy Gallini for many helpful suggestions.

--- Page 5 ---

--- Page 6 ---
A STUDY IN RESISTANCE TO INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE:
THE LOST GAME OF LATIN AMERICAN LAND REFORM
by
Alain de Janvry and Elisabeth Sadoulet
. Theoretical Approaches to Institutional Change 
Explaining and monitoring institutional change are important aspects of
economics which only recently have started to receive significant attention in
formal analysis. While this work happened principally in the fields of indus-
trial organization and finance it is particularly relevant to development
economics. This is due to the extensiveness of market failures in the less-
developed countries and in the complexity of the institutions which these
failures induce as well as to the power of redistributive forces in highly
inegalitarian societies and to the strength of entrenched social norms. Any
attempt at analyzing reformism in this second-best context thus requires en-
dogenizing institutional change in the economic models used. In agriculture,
few institutions are more important than the land tenure system and it is to
thelogic and potential for land reform that this paper is addressed.
Approaches to institutional change have generally followed either the
theory of transactions costs or that of collective action. The first focuses
on rational choices by individual decisionmakers or by the state in a context
of incomplete or failing markets and derives from this the relative social
efficiency of alternative institutions. Institutional change is thus explained
by the quest for net private or social gains pursued by individuals or by an
active state with considerable autonomy. The forms of institution that mini-
mize total transactions costs are thus the ones which survive the test of com-
petition (North).

--- Page 7 ---

--- Page 8 ---
Collective action by contrast focuses on distibutional and normative de-
terminants of political behavior which generally result in net social losses
(Olson). The state is in this case seen as a passive arena of conflict, re-
sponding through institutional changes to pressures and inducements coming
from organized lobbies. Rational choice here applies to the rent-seeking
activities of groups and to the responses of politicians and bureaucrats.
Disfunctional institutions in terms of efficiency can thus be explained to
exist for distributional or normative reasons (Akerlof).
While these two approaches are logically complementary, in very few stud-
ies have they been used jointly, particularly in terms of dynamic feedbacks
where institutional changes motivated by the desire to save on transactions
costs induce other institutional changes motivated by distributional gains
(for exceptions, see Hirschman and Rausser). Integrating the transactions
costs and the collective action approaches allows to understand institutional
change as part of path-dependent sequences that result from series of moves
between the actors involved. We develop in this paper a methodology for inte-
grating the transactions costs and the collective action approaches. We do so
by specifying individual rational choice models for the agents involved, de-
riving from this the economic payoffs associated with institutional alterna-
tives and constructing on that basis a model of collective action. The
ability to engage in collective action is, however, modified by previous
institutional changes. This results in path-dependent sequences of institu-
tional change where the institutional outcome is eventually different from
that which would have been predicted both by a transactions costs approach and
1a collective action approach. The reason why this happens in this particular
case is because the state has economic rational expectations but political
myopia due to its short-term political horizon and high discount rate for net
clf
ti
tt
r
ti
si
Ar
11
Oi
st
wl
St
P(
tC
g:
St
a
cc
er

--- Page 9 ---

--- Page 10 ---
h.
for net social gains. This does not allow it to anticipate how institutional
change, motivated by the desire to reduce transactions costs, leads to a re-
distribution of political power and transforms future collective action with
the result that it eventually blocks future net social gains generating insti-
tutional changes. The model is applied to the episode of Latin, American land .
reforms which failed to achieve the promised net social gains by asset redis-
tribution because they were rendered economically infeasible as a result of
shifting political power induced by the very land reform initiatives.
II. Land Reform Without Land Redistribution 
Family farmers by and large have been the great absents in the Latin
American agrarian structure. In spite of 25 years of legislated land reforms
in basically every country since the 1961 Punta del Este conference of the
Organization of American States, the land tenure system remains equally, if
not increasingly, polarized. At one end of the distribution of farm sizes,
subfamily farms have increased in number by 92 percent between 1950 and 1980,
while their average size has fallen by 13 percent. The latest available cen-
suses for 21 countries indicate that these farms roughly account for some 50
percent of the total number of farms do not use more than 2 percent of the
total area in farms, and average in size less than 2 hectares. While no
global information exits, data from 11 case studies throughout the continent
suggest that households on these subfamily farms do not derive on the aver-
age more than half of their income from their own farms; the remaining income
comes primarily from wages (de Janvry, Sadoulet and Wilcox). At the other
end of the distribution of farm sizes, medium and large farms which are net
employers can be estimated to represent some 26 percent of the farms and

--- Page 11 ---

--- Page 12 ---
-4-
to occupy no less than 90 percent of the land (de Janvry, 1981; Grindle).
Clearly, land reforms have failed to break the bipolarity of the Latin
American land tenure system.
This is a paradoxical observation given the following four facts:
1. It is widely acknowledged that redistributive land reforms that
create family farms out of large farms can increase total factor
productivity at social prices (TTP*) in agriculture since an
inverse relation generally exists between TFP* and farm size.
This has been observed empirically (Barraclough, Dorner, Berry
and Cline) and established theoretically (Feder; Eswaran and
Kotwal).
2. Politically, redistributive land reforms remain a hot political
issue which tends to be reactivated in the current context of
return of democracy. This is best witnessed in Brazil where the
national debate on land reform is creating destabilizing politi-
cal tensions.
. A number of successful redistributive land reforms have occurred
on other continents, particularly. Asia, which provide concrete
examples that could be imitated.
. Numerous Latin American land reforms have been enacted under the
banner of redistribution to create family farms (or, equiva-
lently cooperatives). These reforms have generally been highly
successful in using the threat of expropriation to induce mod-
ernization on large and medium farms (60 irrigated hectares in
Chile, 200 in Mexico) while failing to significantly redistribute
land toward family farms.
1

--- Page 13 ---
The thesis of this paper is that the Latin American states have lost the
opportunity to create net social gains via redistributive land reform because
they chose to first modernize medium and large farms using expropriation as a
threat instead of proceeding with outright expropriation and redistribution.
This threat was taken seriously and led to defensive strategies on the part of
landlords including excess modernization, manipulating the state into making
the promise of nonexpropriation-if-modernization credible, and effective rent
seeking that made subsequent redistributive land reforms socially uneconomical.
We start from the observation that imperfections on the land (or credit)
and labor markets create an inverse relation between TFP* and farm size.
Under this second-best situation redistributive land reform (an institutional
change) can be used as a surrogate for market forces (perfect land market and
no transactions costs in access to labor) to increase social optimality in
resource allocation. If the transactions costs associated with redistribution
are less than those created by the two initial distortions, the net social
gains created by redistribution can allow for Pareto optimality after com-
pensation of the expropriated landlords.
The particular land reform strategy that was followed in Latin. America
after 1961 (with the exception of Nicaragua) sought to use the threat of ex-
propriation combined with generous programs of agricultural development (pub-
lic goods such as extension services, infrastucture investments and new
technologies) to induce modernization of medium and large farms instead of
outright expropriation and redistribution. The game was in a sense poten-
tially well played since it was meant to force landlords into levels of
modernization that would increase TFP* on medium and large farms above the
level on small farms or to induce them to modernize to subsequently expro-
priate them. Modernization of medium and large farms however, created

--- Page 14 ---
-6-
economic and, hence, political power among these farmers which allowed them to
gain (or reinforce their) privileged access to the state. This political
power could then be used either to commit the state into making the promise o
nonexpropriation-if-modernization credible or to successfully engage into
rent-seeking activities. In both cases redistributive land reform remains
valid in terms of economic calculus at social prices but no longer possible
for economic reasons in the new political context. The result is a deadlock
in terms of redistributive land reform, which was created by the state itself
through the strategy it followed to play the game of land reform with politi-
cally responsive landlords and whose chances of successful collective action
it was unable to predict (either for lack of political foresight or because
political restructuring was beyond the political horizon of the state it-
self). A policy intervention that was meant to create net social gains
resulted, through the interplay between economic and political markets, in
creating net social losses or at least in losing the opportunity to create net
social gains through redistributive actions of the state.
We first derive the payoffs for alternative land tenure options from a
model of farm household decision making. To each land tenure option corre-
sponds a total household income a level of income per acre, a level of land
productivity, and a level of TFP at social prices. Once these payoffs are
established, land reform is conceptualized as a noncooperative game between
the landlords and the state. Both the state and the landlords have perfect
-economic foresight, but the state underestimates the likelihood that the land-
lords engage in successful collective action. We finally derive the essential
empirical components of this game by reference to Latin America and illustrate
the validity of the game's predictions by looking at concrete Latin American
land reform experiences.
1

--- Page 15 ---
III. Transactions Costs: The Payoff Structure 
To establish the payoffs for the state, landlords (large farmers) and
family farmers associated with a large farm structure as opposed to a family
farm structure, we construct a simple behavioral model for a farm household.
The model incorporates supervision costs associated with the use of hired
labor due to moral hazards. Supervision is a nontradable function that is
fulfilled by the farm owner. Family farms are defined as farms of a size such
that there is no hired labor in addition to family labor and, hence, no super-
vision costs. On farms with labor hired in there are decreasing returns from
supervision, and the cost of supervision is determined by the farmer's oppor-
tunity cost. For simplicity, there is no land rental market and no explicit
limitation in access to credit. Similar results would, however, be obtained
with a land market and no credit market, i.e., a situation where land is a
collateral for access to credit so that credit is proportional to landowner-
ship (Eswaran and Kotwal). The farmer's objective function is to maximize
where
+ s = 1 (time constraint)
= leisure time
. supervision time
= s(L) s(0) = 0, 0, s"
u = u(2,), u(1) = 0 u' > 0 u"
utility of leisure
Q(L, T) homogeneous of degree 1
u(l)
0 (supervision function)
0 (utility function)

--- Page 16 ---
and
Y = utility, referred to as income
p = product price
Q = output
L = labor input
= fixed index of land and capital, referred to as farm size
w wage rate.
We approximate the utility for leisure by the linear terms in a Taylor expan-
sion as follows:
u(i) = def1 - s(L)] = s' • L - v(L) L < 0, v' > 0.
Hence, Y = p Q(14, - b./ + v(L)] L. The maximization behavior of the farmer
leads to a decreasing land productivity. Q/K with T and to an implicit land
rent, defined as profit per unit of land ra) = VA, which also decreases
withT. Defining the share of land in the gross value of output as
and the share of labor as
TFP at market prices i •
an
of
pL
ti
1
10.

--- Page 17 ---
In their empirical analysis of the relation between land productivity
and farm size in a number of countries, Berry and Cline observe that the share
of land (where the land input for them, like here, measures all nonlabor in-
puts) increases with farm size which implies that the elasticity of substitu-
tion between labor and land aLA is greater than one. This is all the moreP
likely to be true where this "land" input includes an important component of
laborsaving capital such as tractors and other machinery which is highly sub-
stitutable for labor. With aLA 1, shi, decreases with:P; and TFP at market
prices increases with farm size. At social prices (denoted by a star) with
unemployment in the economy,
surplus labor
v* = v(L) the opportunity cost of supervisory labor
r* = the opportunity cost of land, where is is the
average implicit land rent in the farm sector.
Maintaining the same allocation of resources, TFP becomes
IF?* - 1/p 
v(L) L + -A- sh   sh —w +v Ar
For family farms v = 0 and TFP* E T
For large farms *and TFP E-  Q/ 
'1 + v(L)Lff
Since Q/K is a decreasing function of Tt, TFP* decreases with farm sizes
irrespective of the size of a LA. Introducing additionally supervision

--- Page 18 ---
-10-
costs further depresses TFP* on large farms and reinforces the inverse rela-
tion between TFP* and farm size.
Maximum income at market prices increases with farm size while income per T
acre, y = (Y/K) = r(A), decreases with farm size. We thus have the following
payoffs for landlords, family farmers, and the state (in terms of TFP*):
Y1YA
Small
Farms
 —__—*
Large A Small
Farms Farms
TFP*A
Total (Y) and per, acre (y)
income for small and large
farms.
Large
Farms
Total factor productivity 
at social prices by farm
size.
With these relations, a land reform that redistributes large'farms into family
farms is both desirable since it increases TFP* and feasible with compensation
since income per acre is also increased.
We now consider the defensive strategies that landlords can follow to make
land reform either no longer desirable in terms of TFP* or no longer feasible
in terms of compensation. One is when technological change a is introduced
at a private cost C(A), C' > 0, per acre with the defensive purpose of in-
creasing TFP* above that on family farms. In this case,

--- Page 19 ---
and
-11-
mD = a(C) p Q(L, - w + van L - C < Ym
= - C <
If the private resources which landlords use either have zero social opportu-
nity cost or are a sunken cost that makes their use in alternative activities
impossible,
a[C) Q 
v(L) L + A
TFP*
aume
Small Large
Farms Farms
Since total factor productivity at social prices is now higher than the
level that "can be achieved by redistributive land reform, the latter is no
longer desirable to increase TFP*. Compensation of landlords would however,
still be feasible sinceYF

--- Page 20 ---
••
1. -12-
The second strategy is when technological change can be paid for by
successful rent-seeking activities, RCA), R' > 0, per acre. In this case
larger farm income and TFP* are
T3
a(C) p Q(L [w + v(L)] L R)
a(C)Q
Y2yA
Small
Farms
Large
Farms
TFP*
Small
Farms
In terms of TFP*, land reform remains even more desirable since the social
cost of this modernization is increased and TR < TM < TF. If, as it has been
observed in areas where substantial technology occurred yields are an in-
creasing function of farm size, then necessarily yR > F and redistribu-
tion with compensation of landlords is no longer feasible.
Adding a traditional technology as the pre-land reform starting point we
can summarize the payoff matrix for the landlords family farmers, and the
state (TFP*) as follows. Feasibility of redistribution with compensation
holds when income (utility) per acre achieved by the landlords is less than
that of farmers.

--- Page 21 ---
-13-
Income per 
acre of land-
Landlord Farmer State lords relative 
income income I1757- to farmer
Traditional (T) YT TT
Modernized (M) Yls4 TM
Modernized defensive (MD) YMD TmD
Modernized rent seeker (R) YR TR
Farmer (F) YF TF
Farmer with promise (FP) YF TFP
> T > TFP R
> YF > YM YMD > YT
landlord income
TFP*
income per acre
The graphs in Figure 1 summarize these three relations.
IV. A Noncooperative Game Between the State and Landlords 
Land reform can be conceptualized as a noncooperative game between the
state and the landlords. The state is motivated by the search of land tenure
alternatives to minimize transactions costs in agriculture, i.e., to maximize
TFP*. The landlords are motivated by maximizing income Y. In the initial
situation T the landlords do not have the ability to engage in collective
action. Both the state and the landlords have full knowledge of the economic
consequences (TFP*, Y) of any institutional alternative. Once landlords have

--- Page 22 ---
Small
Farms
Small
Farms
Large
Farms
Large
Farms
Q/A
Figure 1
Income, TFP at social prices and Land productivity
Small Large
Farms Farms
Small Large
Farms Farms
• by Farm size

--- Page 23 ---
-15-
modernized (to M or MD), their enhanced economic status gives them the possi-
bility of engaging in collective action with a probability P of success. Col-
lective action can be directed either at rent seeking (MR) or to wrest from
the state credible promises of nonexpropriation (MP).
The land reform game is played under two alternative structuralcondi-
tions: in one case, landlords are not compensated for expropriated lands and
they are only allowed to keep a family farm yielding an income YF. In the
other case landlords are compensated at the last income level reached before
expropriation, less a subjective cost E.
To simplify the presentation, we first consider the land reform game when
the probability of successful collective action is zero. In Figures 2 and 3,
this means that the strategies available to the state and the landlords ex-
clude the boxed areas.
The moves available to the state are to either implement a redistributive
land reform outright or to threaten of expropriation if modernization does not
occur (referred to as modernizing land reform) while at the same time making
new opportunities to modernize available under the form of public goods such
as technology and infrastructure (referred to as agricultural development).
If two strategies lead to the same solutions, for instance F, the state will
choose the alternative of first modernizing the large farms since the marginal
cost of raising TFP* with agricultural development is less than with rural
development programs. The landlords can respond by refusing to modernize (T),
-modernizing in response to agricultural development incentives (M) or over-
modernizing defensively (MD) at their own cost to raise TFP* above that of
family farmers and thus protect themselves from expropriation.
Figure 2 shows the land reform game when no compensation is paid for the
expropriated land. If the state offers a modernizing land reform, landlords

--- Page 24 ---
Note: MD1 = Private resources with zero social opportunity cost or sunken cost
MD2 = Private resources with positive social opportunity cost
Figure 2 - Land Reform Without Compensation

--- Page 25 ---
MDi
FT)
MP
—17-
1 - P
P
!Success
1
State
Stat6
awe ow. 4.ite ...re wait .011; wilp ammo
-
Figure 3 - Land Reform With Compensation
 —CD MR
trSji,*

--- Page 26 ---
-18-
cannot choose M since the promise of nonexpropriation-if-modernization is
not credible because the state could still reach TF > TM by expropriating
them. The solution is thus defensive modernization. where T > TF but YF
Y < Y NI Landlords thus incur a private cost in protecting themselvesMD *
against expropriation. If these private resources have a low social oppor-
tunity cost, imposing a redistributive land reform is not rational for the
state, and the solution is MD1 with payoff (Ymp > FT MD T ). If the F
private resources used for defensive modernization have an ex ante social op-
portunity cost, but are ex post sunken cost because they have been specifi-
cally committed to the modernization of large farms, redistributive land
reform is blocked as well at MD1' It is only when these resources have a
positive social opportunity cost and can be reallocated to the modernization
of small farms that a redistributive land reform preserves its economic
rationale in spite of defensive modernization MD2. Redistributive land
reform does then occur, and the final payoff is (YF < Ymp, TF > ; DI) Since
the landlords choose the type of defensive modernization they engage in, they
will pursue defensive modernization if the private resources used have a zero
opportunity cost or they will seek making expropriation uneconomical by engag-
ing in clay-type investments when resources used have a positive social oppor-
tunity cost.
Figure 3 shows this same game with compensation. In this case the
landlords have no incentive to engage in defensive modernization if Ym
-e < Y. The state will either proceed directly with a redistributiveMD 
land reform or, after the landlords have modernized to M, expropriate them
with a compensation Y Since the marginal cost of raising TFP* via
agricultural development is expectedly less than via rural development the
stat
exp:
lat
re
ti

--- Page 27 ---
-19-
state will choose to first pursue a modernizing land reform to M and then
expropriate with compensation to F.
As played by the two actors with full economic information on transactions
costs and no collective action, the land reform program thus generates net
social gains. With no compensation paid, the solution is defensive moderniza-
tion MD1 where (YMD < Y TMD > TF ). With compensation paid, redistributiveF 
land reform does occur with the resulting payoff (Ym - E > TF > y.
Path-Dependent Institutional Change:
From Market to Political Failure 
model we started with has two market failures: There is no land mar-
ket and there are transactions costs associated with hired labor due to the
need to supervise. Alternatively, this model could have specified a land
rental market but no credit market (access to credit being determined by
landownership since land is the necessary collateral) and labor supervision
costs. These two distortions together generate an inverse relation between
TFP* and farm size. Redistributive government intervention can be used to
reduce the transactions costs created by these market failures and generate
net social gains. Allocative efficiency can thus be .enhanced through institu-
tional change: a redistributive land reform that changes the structure of
property rights with compensation to the former landlords; or defensive mod-
ernization in response to the credible threat of expropriation if the private
resources used have a low social opportunity cost and no compensation is paid.
The greater the relative autonomy of the state the greater the likelihood
that either one of these two land reforms will be successfully implemented.
These two initiatives of the state to redistribute productive assets fol-
owing modernization, hawever, open the way to manipulation of the state by

--- Page 28 ---
-20-
interest groups seeking to protect their own interests. This competition in,
political markets results in adding a third distortion to the initial two
which makes land reform economically impossible and (in the case of rent seek-
ing) reduces social efficiency relative to the pre-reform situation.
The modernization of large farms agriculture from (YT, TT) to (I'm 1714
or (Ymp Tk) enhances the economic and, hence, the political power of land
lords. This gives them a probability P > 0 to successfully influence the
state through collective action. The state remains motivated by the goal
raising TFP* but will be increasingly submitted to effective rent-seeking
activities by landlords and to pressures to commit expenses that will make the
promise of nonexpropriation-if-modernization credible. The result is an in-
creasing ability on the part of landlords to use the state to introduce addi-
tional distortions that make future redistributive land reforms eventually
impossible and thus cancel the threat of expropriation and the associated cost
of defensive modernization. The land reform game now includes the landlords
collective action move with its uncertain outcome (represented in the boxed
areas of Figures 2 and 3). Since the state however, systematically under-
estimates P (because of a short-term political horizon and high discount rate
for gains in TFP*), the solution to the land reform game will be a successful
collective action unanticipated by the state.
When expropriation is without compensation (Figure 2), the landlord's
weight over the state will be used to secure a promise of nonexpropriation-.,,
if-modernization by lowering to TFp < TN, the potential level of productivity
that could be reached in the farms created by reform. This can be achieved
for instance by eliminating the land reform budget directed at rural develop-
ment programs. This will allow landlords to cancel the threat of expropriation
elim:
NIr
resu
TFP
last
expr
succ
part
acrE
The
botl
fer:
Sin(
as
of
ren
vis
sta
of
but
upc
b1(

--- Page 29 ---
-21-
eliminate the expenses of defensive modernization, and secure a payoff Ym
YMD* Redistributive land reform is thus made economically Impossible as a
result of collective action since it would only yield a level of TFP* equal to
FP TM*
When expropriation occurs with compensation at the income level of the
last move less c (Figure 3), and if there is a lag between modernization and
expropriation the landlords can use their enhanced economic power to invest
successfully into rent-seeking activities. This allows them to externalize
part of the cost of modernization needed to increase yields and income per
acre above the levels that would be secured by a redistributive land reform.
The social cost of doing this originates in the social opportunity cost of
both the resources invested into rent-seeking activities and the rents trans-
ferred to landlords. The resulting payoff for the state is TR < TM < TF.
Since yF < ylv redistributive land reform with compensation is made impossible
as a result of the distributional gains created by rent seeking to the benefit
landlords.
Adding a third distortion (promise of nonexpropriation-if-modernization or
rent seeking) to the original two (no land or credit market and labor super-
vision costs) eliminates the possibility of a redistributive role for the
state able to create net social gains by reducing transactions costs, in spite
of the fact that TM or TR are below TF the level of TFP* that redistri-
butive land reform would achieve. While economic market failures still call
upon redistributive stateinterventionspolitical market failures have

--- Page 30 ---

--- Page 31 ---
-22-
VI . Epilogue: The Latin American Land Reform Deadlock 
While the threats of redistributive land reforms were effectively waved at
incr
glut,
landlords in the 1960s and early 1970s to coerce them into modernization, the fror
credibility of that threat or the threat itself had essentially disappeared by
the mid-1970s. This occurred in spite of the fact that the creation of family of 1
farms through land redistribution had been minimal indeed, that the land lanc
tenure system had likely become more polarized than it was in 1961, and that libt
the problems of upward pressures in food prices and of extensive rural poverty indt
had, if anything, not been alleviated.
The end of land reform took a variety of forms in different countries (de
Janvry, 1981; and Grindle). In Colombia, a political agreement between the
Conservative and Liberal parties in 1977 officially ended land expropriations,
reallocated the land reform budget to agricultural development investments
and initiated ambitious programs of integrated rural development to modernize
existing family farms without land redistribution. In Chile, the military
regime that assumed power in 1973 not only put an end to expropriations but
returned a third of the expropriated lands to, former owners and auctioned
privately another third, basically to medium and large farmers. Once this was
done, the land reform agency was redirected to tasks of agricultural develop-
ment. In Honduras, the military government increasingly backed away from
. implementing the land reform law and used repression to control land inva-
sions. In Ecuador, peasant organizations creating pressures for land reform
were disbanded and new legislation strengthened the security of land rights
for large farmers and expanded programs of agricultural development to assist
modernization of their holdings. In Peru land expropriations were brought to
'a halt by the neoliberal military regime in 1975, and emphasis was placed on
196
to
mod
tic
riv
fea
tic
unc
an(
by
of
CY.
w€

--- Page 32 ---

--- Page 33 ---
-23-
increasing the productivity of large farms. In Brazil, the budget of the re-
gional development agency for the North East (SUDENE) was reallocated away
from redistributive land reform programs to road-building projects.
In all cases the end of land reform originated in the growing influence
of the medium and large farmers over the state. While it is certain that
landlords had a dominant role over the state throughout the colony and the
liberal period, this power had been strongly eroded by import substitution
industrialization policies and rapid urbanization starting in the 1930s. By
1960, the urban classes together with landless agricultural workers were able
to challenge this power and pass land reform legislation to force landlords to
modernize under the threat of expropriation. The rise in the landlords poli-
tical power in the 1970s was based on the economic power which they had de-
rived from successful modernization. It was compounded by the facts that the
fears of peasant rebellions, fueled in the early 1960s by the Cuban revolu-
tion rapidly decreased and that the political importance of the peasantry was
undermined by urbanization and the rise to power of neoliberal authoritarian
regimes diminishing political pressures for land redistribution. This rising
hegemony of the medium and large farmers was used by them to secure two advan-
tages from the state: a credible promise of nonexpropriation-if-modernization
and successful rent seeking to externalize part of the cost of modernization
particularly under the form of abundant access to subsidized credit.
The promise of nonexpropriation-if-modernization was principally secured
by inducing the state to reallocate the land reform budget and the attention
of land reform agencies to the pursuit of modernization in medium and large
farms. This is exemplified by the weakening of INCORA in Colombia and CORA in
Chile and the redefinition of their tasks like SUDENE in Brazil. Since it is
well known that a successful redistributive land reform requires not only land

--- Page 34 ---

--- Page 35 ---
-24-
redistribution but also costly investments in rural development activities
(such as infrastructure, technical assistance, credit, extension, organiza-
tion, etc.), canceling the budget for the package of programs addressed to
beneficiaires of the land reform made it simply impossible to reach TF
through land redistribution. Instead, further expropriations would be doomed
to result in T FP < Tivii making them economically unjustified. Through political
manipulation of the state to make the promise of nonexpropriation economically
credible, redistributive land reform with no compensation was made impossible.
In situations where expropriation would occur with compensation, power
over the state was used to successfully engage in rent-seeking activities.
The extensiveness of institutional rents in favor of medium and large farms is
well established in Latin America. It takes the form of tax advantages, the
location of public work projects, the nature and availability of technological
progress, selective price-support programs and differential exchange rates,
and, more than anything else access to subsidized credit all of which are
allocated by the forces of the political economy. A few recent figures serve
to illustrate the monopoly of medium and large farmers over credit. In
Colombia, the 1 percent largest farmers received 50 percent of public credit
while the SO percent smallest farmers received 4.2 percent. Across Latin
America, the proportion of farm households receiving any institutional credit
was only 27 percent in Colombia, 22 percent in Venezuela 20 percent in
, Honduras, 16 percent in Mexico, 6 percent in Peru, and 5 percent in Ecuador
(de Janvry, 1981).
Our model predicts that the extent of rent seeking is directly related to
the modernizing initiatives of the state which resulted in enhancing the eco-
nomic and political power of the landlords. While causality is difficult to

--- Page 36 ---
41,
f.
V
r

--- Page 37 ---
-25-
establish, the association between productivity-enhancing government expenses
in agriculture (GEA, which includes public goods such as research and exten-
sion administration, irrigation, education, health, marketing, and land
reform expenses) and the magnitude of credit subsidies (R measured as the
value of public credit to agriculture times the difference between the rate of
inflation and the nominal interest rate paid). As we have seen it access to
subsidized credit is one of the main forms of rent seeking, and its benefits
are principally captured by the large farmers. Using data at constant prices
developd by Elias for 1960 1970 and 1980 for six countries (15 observations)
and dividing GEA and R by the area in cropland (A), we obtain
log -A = -.58
-.81)
.75 log T
4.04)
.56.
For every 1 percent increase in net social gain-creating public goods expendi-
tures in agriculture, there is a 0.75 percent increase in net social loss-
creating institutional rents transferred to the large farmers. Countries with
the highest GEA/A and RIA are Colombia and Brazil. These are also the coun-
tries with the strongest large farmer commodity associations which act as
corporatist forces able to successfully engage in rent-seeking activities.
With access to generous institutional rents for medium and large farmers
well established it is no surprise that yields on farms of family size and
above are frequently observed to have either no significant relation with farm
size or to increase with farm size. Data for Mexico and Peru in the early
1970s show the first pattern (de Janvry, 1986). In regions of Mexico were
substantial investments in modern technology have occurred this relation is
likely to be positive. Burke indeed observes that the adoption of yield-
increasing technologies is substantially more pervasive OR larger than smaller

--- Page 38 ---

--- Page 39 ---
farms. While the technology itself is neutral to scale, differential adoption hi
results from institutional biases favoring the larger farmers. With a positive fc
rE
and farm size, redistributive land reform with compensation is made impossible. Ti
Thus while a redistributive intervention of the state remains justified in
terms of TFP*, it is no longer economically feasible.
Our model predicts that .landlords should use their political power to seek
credible promises of nonexpropriation-if-modernization when expropriation oc-
curs without compensation and to seek institutional rents when expropriation
occurs with compensation. This also is difficult to test empirically. Yet,
the cases of Chile (1962-1967), Colombia, and Brazil are ones where full com-
pensation was offered and substantial rent seeking did develop. Chile after
1967, Peru after 1969, and Honduras are all countries where compensation was
only partial and where guarantees of nonexpropriation were subsequently
wrested from the state. As the case of Colombia shows, effective rent seeking
can evidently also occur once the promise of nonexpropriation has been
obtained.
We conclude that redistributive land reforms failed to materialize in
Latin America because the state sought first to modernize the medium and large
farms as the most cost-effective approach to raising TFP*. Successful mod-
ernization created economic power which reinforced the political power of
landlords. They, in turn, were able to use this power to obtain credible
promises of nonexpropriation and to successfully engage in rent seeking. This
third distortion (credible promises or institutional rents) made redistribu-
tive state interventions to compensate through institutional change, for the
initial two market distortions (no land or credit market and moral hazards in
-26-
relation between yields and farm size and, hence, also between income per acre

--- Page 40 ---

--- Page 41 ---
hiring labor), labor) impossible. The result is a heavy social cost in terms of
foregone TFP* level that could have been achieved by redistributive land
reform and the perpetuation of an extremely unequal pattern of landownership.
The policy implication is that land redistribution should have been sought
outright before modernization endowed the landlords with enough power over
the state to make land reform economically impossible.

--- Page 42 ---

--- Page 43 ---
-28-
References 
Akerlof, G. "The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful
Tales." Quarterly. Journal of Economics 90(1976):599-617.
Barraclough, S. Agrarian Structure in Latin. American. Lexington, Massachu-
setts: Lexington Books, 1973.
Berry, A- and W. Cline. Agrarian Structure and Productivity in Developing
Countries. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979.
Burke R. "Green Revolution Technology and Farm Class in Mexico." Economic 
Development and Cultural Change 28(1979):135-54.
de Janvry, A. The Agrarian Question and Reformism in Latin America.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981.
de Janvry, A. "Farm Structure, Productivity, and Poverty " Paper presented
at the Conference on 'Food, Policy, and Politics: A Perspective on Agri-
culture and Development," Purdue University May, 1986.
de Janvry A-, E. Sadoulet, and L. Wilcox. Rural Labor in Latin America 
Geneva: International Labor Office World Employment Program Research,
WEP 10-6/WP79 June, 1986.
Dorner, P. Land Reform and Economic Development. Baltimore: Penguin Book,
1972.
Elias, V. Government Expenditures on Agriculture and Agricultural Growth in
Latin America IFPRI Research Report No. 50, Washington D. C. October,
1985.
Eswaran MI. and A. Kotwal. "Access to Capital and Agrarian Production Organi-
zation." Economic Journal 96(1986):482-98.
Feder, G. "The Relation Between Farm Size and Farm Productivity.' Journal of 
Development Economics 18(1985):297-313.

--- Page 44 ---

--- Page 45 ---
-29-
Grindle M. State and Countryside: Development Policy and Agrarian Politics
in Latin America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986.
Hirschman, A. Essays in Trespassing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1981.
North, D. "Three Approaches to the Study of Institutions."In Neoclassical 
Political Economy, ed. D. Colander. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger
Publishing Company, 1984.
Olson 184. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1965.
Rausser, G. C. "Political Economic Markets: PERTs and PESTs in Food and
Agriculture." American. Journal of Agricultural Economics 64(1982):821-33.

--- Page 46 ---
•
