
--- Page 1 ---
HOW CULTURE IS DRIVING HUMAN EVOLUTION 
DOMESTICATING OUR SPECIES 
AND MAKING US SMARTER 
JOSEPH HENRICH 
--- Page 2 ---
CHAPTERl 
A PUZZLING PRIMATE 
You and I are members of a rather peculiar species, a puz­
zling primate. 
Long before the origins of agriculture, the first cities, 
or industrial technologies, our ancestors spread across 
the globe, from the arid deserts of Australia to the cold 
steppe of Siberia, and came to inhabit most of the world's 
major land-based ecosystems-more environments than 
any other terrestrial mammal. Yet, puzzlingly, our kind are 
physically weak, slow, and not particularly good at climb­
ing trees. Any adult chimp can readily overpower us, and 
any big cat can easily run us down, though we are oddly 
good at long-distance running and fast, accurate throw­
ing. Our guts are particularly poor at detoxifying poison­
ous plants, yet most of us cannot readily distinguish the 
poisonous ones from the edible ones. We are dependent on 
eating cooked food, though we don't innately know how to 
make fire or cook. Compared to other mammals of our size 
and diet, our colons are too short, stomachs too small, and 
teeth too petite. Our infants are born fat and dangerously 
premature, with skulls that have not yet fused. Unlike 
other apes, females of our kind remain continuously sexu­
ally receptive throughout their monthly cycle and cease 
reproduction (menopause) long before they die. Perhaps 
most surprising of all is that despite our oversized brains, 
our kind are not that bright, at least not innately smart 
enough to explain the immense success of our species. 
Perhaps you are skeptical about this last point? 
Suppose we took you and forty-nine of your coworkers 
and pitted you in a game of Survivor against a troop of fifty 
capuchin monkeys from Costa Rica. We would parachute 
both primate teams into the remote tropical forests of cen­
tral Africa. After two years, we would return and count the 
survivors on each team. The team with the most survivors 
wins. Of course, neither team would be permitted to bring 
any equipment: no matches, water containers, knives, 
shoes, eyeglasses, antibiotics, pots, guns, or rope. To be 
kind, we would allow the humans-but not the monkeys 
-to wear clothes. Both teams would thus face surviving 
--- Page 3 ---
for years in a novel forest environment with only their 
wits, and their teammates, to rely on. 
Who would you bet on, the monkeys or you and your 
colleagues? Well, do you know how to make arrows, nets, 
and shelters? Do you know which plants or insects are 
toxic (many are) or how to detoxify them? Can you start 
a fire without matches or cook without a pot? Can you 
manufacture a fishhook? Do you know how to make nat­
ural adhesives? Which snakes are venomous? How will 
you protect yourself from predators at night? How will 
you get water? What is your knowledge of animal track­
ing? 
Let's face it, chances are your human team would lose, 
and probably lose badly, to a bunch of monkeys, des­
pite your team's swollen crania and ample hubris. If not 
for surviving as hunter-gatherers in Africa, the continent 
where our species evolved, what are our big brains for any­
way? How did we manage to expand into all those diverse 
environments across the globe? 
The secret of our species' success lies not in our raw, 
innate, intelligence or in any specialized mental abilities 
that fire up when we encounter the typical problems 
that repeatedly challenged our hunter-gatherer ancestors 
in the Pleistocene. Our ability to survive and thrive as 
hunter-gatherers, or anything else, across an immense 
range of global environments is not due to our individual 
brainpower applied to solving complex problems. As you 
will see in chapter 2, stripped of our culturally acquired 
mental skills and know-how, we are not so impressive 
when we go head-to-head in problem-solving tests against 
other apes, and we certainly are not impressive enough to 
account for the vast success of our species or for our much 
larger brains .l 
In fact, we have seen various versions of the human 
half of our Survivor experiment many times, as hapless 
European explorers have struggled to survive, stranded in 
seemingly hostile environments, from the Canadian Arc­
tic to the Gulf Coast of Texas. As chapter 3 shows, these 
cases usually end in the same way: either the explorers 
all die, or some of them are rescued by a local indigen­
ous population, which has comfortably been living in this 
"hostile environment" for centuries or millennia. Thus, 
the reason why your team would lose to the monkeys is 
that your species-unlike all others-has evolved an ad­
diction to culture. By "culture" I mean the large body 
of practices, techniques, heuristics, tools, motivations, 
--- Page 4 ---
values, and beliefs that we all acquire while growing up, 
mostly by learning from other people. Your team's only 
hope is that you might bump into, and befriend, one of 
the groups of hunter-gatherers who live in the central Af­
rican forests, like the Efe pygmies. These pygmy groups, 
despite their short stature, have been flourishing in these 
forests for a very long time because past generations have 
bequeathed to them an immense body of expertise, skills, 
and abilities that permit them to survive and thrive in the 
forest. 
The key to understanding how humans evolved and 
why we are so different from other animals is to recognize 
that we are a cultural species. Probably over a million years 
ago, members of our evolutionary lineage began learning 
from each other in such a way that culture became cu­
mulative. That is, hunting practices, tool-making skills, 
tracking know-how, and edible-plant knowledge began to 
improve and aggregate-by learning from others-so that 
one generation could build on and hone the skills and 
know-how gleaned from the previous generation. After 
several generations, this process produced a sufficiently 
large and complex toolkit of practices and techniques that 
individuals, relying only on their own ingenuity and per-
sonal experience, could not get anywhere close to figuring 
out over their lifetime. We will see myriad examples of 
such complex cultural packages, from Inuit snow houses, 
Fuegian arrows, and Fijian fish taboos to numerals, writ­
ing, and the abacus. 
Once these useful skills and practices began to accu­
mulate and improve over generations, natural selection 
had to favor individuals who were better cultural learn­
ers, who could more effectively tap in to and use the ever­
expanding body of adaptive information available. The 
newly produced products of this cultural evolution, such 
as fire, cooking, cutting tools, clothing, simple gestural 
languages, throwing spears, and water containers, became 
the sources of the main selective pressures that genetically 
shaped our minds and bodies. This interaction between 
culture and genes, or what I'll call culture-gene coevolution, 
drove our species down a novel evolutionary pathway not 
observed elsewhere in nature, making us very different 
from other species-a new kind of animal. 
However, recognizing that we are a cultural species only 
makes an evolutionary approach even more important. 
As you'll soon see in chapter 4, our capacities for learn­
ing from others are themselves finely honed products of 
--- Page 5 ---
) 
natural selection. We are adaptive learners who, even as 
infants, carefully select when, what, and from whom to 
learn. Young learners all the way up to adults (even MBA 
students) automatically and unconsciously attend to and 
preferentially learn from others based on cues of pres­
tige, success, skill, sex, and ethnicity. From other people 
we readily acquire tastes, motivations, beliefs, strategies, 
and our standards for reward and punishment. Cul­
ture evolves, often invisibly, as these selective attention 
and learning biases shape what each person attends to, 
remembers, and passes on. Nevertheless, these cultural 
learning abilities gave rise to an interaction between an ac­
cumulating body of cultural information and genetic evo­
lution that has shaped, and continues to shape, our anat­
omy, physiology, and psychology. 
Anatomically and physiologically, the escalating need to 
acquire this adaptive cultural information drove the rapid 
expansion of our brains, giving us the space to store and 
organize all this information, while creating the extended 
childhoods and long postmenopausal lives that give us the 
time to acquire all this know-how and the chance to pass it 
on. Along the way, we'll see that culture has left its marks 
all over our bodies, shaping the genetic evolution of our 
feet, legs, calves, hips, stomachs, ribs, fingers, ligaments, 
jaws, throats, teeth, eyes, tongues, and much more. It has 
also made us powerful throwers and long-distance run­
ners who are otherwise physically weak and fat. 
Psychologically, we have come to rely so heavily on the 
elaborate and complicated products of cultural evolution 
for our survival that we now often put greater faith in 
what we learn from our communities than in our own 
personal experiences or innate intuitions. Once we under­
stand our reliance on cultural learning, and how cultural 
evolution's subtle selective processes can produce "solu­
tions" that are smarter than we are, otherwise puzzling 
phenomena can be explained. Chapter 6 illustrates this ~ 
point by tackling questions such as, Why do people in hot 
climates tend to use more spices and find them tastier? 
Why did aboriginal Americans commonly put burnt sea­
shells or wood ash into their corn-meal? How could an­
cient divination rituals effectively implement game theor­
etic strategies to improve hunting returns? 
The growing body of adaptive information available in 
the minds of other people also drove genetic evolution 
to create a second form of human status, called prestige, 
which now operates alongside the dominance status we 
--- Page 6 ---
inherited from our ape ancestors. Once we understand 
prestige, it will become clear why people unconsciously 
mimic more successful individuals in conversations; why 
star basketball players like LeBron James can sell car insur­
ance; how someone can be famous for being famous (the 
Paris Hilton Effect); and, why the most prestigious par­
ticipants should donate first at charity events but speak 
last in decision-making bodies, like the Supreme Court. 
The evolution of prestige came with new emotions, motiv­
ations, and bodily displays that are distinct from those as­
sociated with dominance. 
Beyond status, culture transformed the environments 
faced by our genes by generating social norms. Norms in­
fluence a vast range of human action, including ancient 
and fundamentally important domains such as kin re­
lations, mating, food sharing, parenting, and reciprocity. 
Over our evolutionary history, norm violations such as 
ignoring a food taboo, botching a ritual, or failing to 
give one's in-laws their due from one's hunting successes 
meant reputational damage, gossip, and a consequent loss 
of marriage opportunities and allies. Repeated norm vio­
lations sometimes provoked ostracism or even execution 
at the hands of one's community. Thus, cultural evolution 
initiated a process of self-domestication, driving genetic 
evolution to make us prosocial, docile, rule followers who 
expect a world governed by social norms monitored and 
enforced by communities. 
Understanding the process of self-domestication will 
allow us to address many key questions. In chapters 9 
to 11 , we'll explore questions such as, How did rituals 
become so psychologically potent, capable of solidifying 
social bonds and fostering harmony in communities? How 
do marriage norms make better fathers and expand our 
family networks? Why is our automatic and intuitive re­
sponse to stick to a social norm, even if that means pay­
ing a personal cost? Similarly, when and why does careful 
reflection cause greater selfishness? Why do people who 
wait for the "walk signal" at traffic lights also tend to 
be good cooperators? What was the psychological effect 
of World War II on America's Greatest Generation? Why 
do we prefer to interact with, and learn from, those who 
speak the same dialect as we do? How did our species 
become the most social of primates, capable of living in 
populations of millions, and at the same time, become the 
most nepotistic and warlike? 
--- Page 7 ---
at least mentally better equipped to thrive in our current 
environments (so, "smarter"). You, for example, prob­
ably received a massive cultural download while growing 
up that included a convenient base-10 counting system, 
handy Arabic numerals for easy representation, a vocabu­
lary of at least 60,000 words (if you are a native English 
speaker), and working examples of the concepts surround­
ing pulleys, springs, screws, bows, wheels, levers, and 
adhesives. Culture also provides heuristics, sophisticated 
cognitive skills like reading, and mental prostheses like 
the abacus that have evolved culturally to both fit, and to 
some degree, modify our brains and biology. However, as 
you'll see, we don't have these tools, concepts, skills, and 
heuristics because our species is smart; we are smart be­
cause we have culturally evolved a vast repertoire of tools, 
concepts, skills, and heuristics. Culture makes us smart. 
Besides driving much of our species genetic evolution 
and making us (somewhat) "self-programmable," culture 
has woven itself into our biology and psychology in other 
ways. By gradually selecting institutions, values, reputa­
tional systems, and technologies over the eons, cultural 
evolution has influenced the development of our brains, 
hormonal responses, and immune reactions, as well as 
calibrating our attention, perceptions, motivations, and 
reasoning processes to better fit the diverse culturally con­
structed worlds in which we grow up. As we'll see in 
chapter 14, culturally acquired beliefs alone can change 
pain into pleasure, make wine more (or less) enjoyable, 
and, in the case of Chinese astrology, alter the length of 
believers' lives. Social norms, including those contained in 
languages, effectively supply training regimes that shape 
our brains in various ways, ranging from expanding our 
hippocampus to thickening our corpus callosum (the in­
formation highway that connects the two halves of our 
brains). Even without influencing genes, cultural evolu­
tion creates both psychological and biological differences 
between populations. You, for example, have been altered 
biologically by the aforementioned cultural download of 
skills and heuristics. 
In the chapter 1 7, I'll explore how this view of our spe­
cies changes how we think about several key questions: 
1. What makes humans unique? 
2. Why are humans so cooperative compared to other 
mammals? 
3. Why do societies vary so much in their cooperative­
ness? 
--- Page 8 ---
4. Why do we seem so smart compared to other ani­
mals? 
5. What makes societies innovative, and how will the 
Internet influence this? 
6. Is culture still driving genetic evolution? 
The answers to these questions alter how we think 
about the interface of culture, genes, biology, institutions, 
and history and how we approach human behavior and 
psychology. This approach also has important practical 
implications for how we build institutions, design pol­
icies, address social problems, and understand human di­
versity. 