
--- Page 1 ---
Introduction
The ‘transition’ in this book’s title refers to an old historical dilemma, which
goes back to the beginnings of scientiﬁc history in the nineteenth century.
The post-Roman centuries have usually been divided between the medieval
and the modern periods, with a line drawn around the year 1500. Charac-
teristics of modernity include new forms of the state, religious diversity, and
the spread of renaissance ideas. Those inﬂuenced by Marxist ideas prefer to
think of feudalism being superseded by capitalism, which can be dated as late
as the eighteenth century, but the decades around 1500, the age of the English
enclosures and the voyages of discovery, can be seen as a signiﬁcant turning
point in that process. Those using the vocabulary and concepts of ‘medieval’
and ‘modern’, and those favouring ‘feudal’ and ‘capitalist’ recognize that
changes did not occur overnight, and therefore expect to ﬁnd a transitional
phase, and this idea provided the starting point for this exploration of social
and economic tendencies at the end of the middle ages.
1
Here it will be shown that social structures and methods of production
were remodelled in the long ﬁfteenth century (1350–1520), reiterating the
traditional view of the signiﬁcance of that period. A number of the charac-
teristics of the economy at the end of the middle ages, however, can be traced
back to the thirteenth century. Those who promoted change included people
below the ranks of the gentry, including the peasants who are sometimes seen
as the victims.
2 This conclusion leads to an emphasis on the social basis of
1 For the debate on the transition, R. H. Hilton (ed.), The T ransition from Feudalism to
Capitalism (London, 1976); R. J. Holton, The T ransition from Feudalism to Capitalism (London,
1985).
2 For the controversy on this issue, see T . H. Aston and C. H. E. Philpin (eds.), The Brenner
Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe (Cambridge,
1985); P . Glennie, ‘In Search of Agrarian Capitalism: Manorial Land Markets and the Acquisition of
Land in the Lea Valley c.1450–c.1560’, Continuity and Change , 3 (1988), 11–40; R. W . Hoyle,
‘T enure and the Land Market in Early Modern England: Or a Late Contribution to the Brenner
Debate’,Ec.HR, 2nd ser., 43 (1990), 1–20; M. E. Mate, ‘The East Sussex Land Market and Agrarian
Class Structure in the Late Middle Ages’, P&P 139 (1993), 46–65.Dyer, C. (2005). An age of transition? : Economy and society in england in the later middle ages. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from cunygc on 2023-02-28 22:40:31.
Copyright © 2005. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
--- Page 2 ---
change, against a background of ﬂuctuations in population, prices, wages,
and rents.
Historians of economy and society have been offered in the ‘transition
from feudalism to capitalism’ a framework for interpreting the past. Accord-
ing to Marx and his successors, a feudal society or mode of production was
fundamentally agrarian and based on the extraction of rents and services from
a dependent peasantry by a ruling aristocracy. This was replaced by capital-
ism, in which entrepreneurs who owned the means of production employed a
class of wage-earners, and were governed in their economic activities by the
forces of the market. This scheme of historical change now seems old-
fashioned, with its use of such outmoded terms as ‘class’, yet as with many
of these old questions, even if we use different words we cannot escape from
the fundamental problem.
T o use more conventional twenty-ﬁrst-century language, England in 1150
had a mainly agricultural economy, with a numerous peasantry. Exchange was
limited, so that there were relatively few towns, and industry was based on
handicrafts in family workshops. A powerful aristocracy extracted wealth
through rents and services from a subordinate peasantry. Custom, tradition,
patronage, honour, service, and coercion played a large part in social rela-
tions. The church enjoyed great landed resources, controlled education, and
inﬂuenced the whole of society though its teachings. All of these character-
istics had changed considerably by 1550. T rade had become part of everyone’s
daily experience, towns had multiplied, England was one of the most indus-
trialized countries in Europe, much land was worked in holdings so large that
we doubt whether we should call their tenants peasants, and lords’ economic
inﬂuence had been weakened. The market had a more pervasive impact, and
service in exchange for the tenure of land played little part in social relations.
Private courts wielded reduced power, and many customs had lapsed. The
church had been brought under closer control by the state. Much remained of
the old conditions, and world trade, colonial expansion, large farms, factor-
ies, and secular education would not be fully established until the nineteenth
century. Historians should be concerned with explaining how, when, and why
these transformations came about.
The lectures which are the basis of this book examine a long chronology of
economic and social change. They argue that many of the tendencies of the
end of the middle ages had their roots in a much earlier period. The
framework of units of landholding and the agrarian landscape had been
created before 1200. The network of towns had largely formed by 1300.
When the number of ﬁelds enclosed within hedges was controversially
increased around 1500, much of the land in some districts had been lying
in closes and crofts for centuries, and indeed there had been an earlier
2 Introduction
Dyer, C. (2005). An age of transition? : Economy and society in england in the later middle ages. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from cunygc on 2023-02-28 22:40:31.
Copyright © 2005. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
--- Page 3 ---
controversy over enclosure in the early thirteenth century. The advance
of commercialization, as towns grew and markets multiplied in the thirteenth
century, has led to doubts about whether the changes of the long ﬁfteenth
century were of much signiﬁcance. 3
We must accept that marketing and a commercial mentality grew before
1300, but not lose sight of the impressive developments after 1350. The
initial burgeoning of the commercial economy took place in the period of
rising population in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, when numbers grew
from perhaps 21⁄2 million in 1100 to 5 or 6 million in 1300. In the fourteenth
century the population was halved. The decline began with the famine of
1315–17, continued with the slow erosion of the period 1320–48, and then
accelerated with the epidemics of 1348–9 and 1361–2. In the long ﬁfteenth
century the population remained obstinately low, apparently hovering
around 2
1⁄2 million until about 1540. Resources, and particularly land, were
therefore concentrated in fewer hands, and the rewards of wage-earners were
high. This period of relatively high individual incomes had a wide impact on
the shape of the economy, because improved living standards resulted in new
patterns of consumption, with demand for high-quality foodstuffs such as
beef, and for textiles, housing, and other goods. At the same time, and of
greater long-term signiﬁcance, land was being brought together in larger
holdings, and more land was being managed by tenants rather than by lords.
Cloth-making, an industry which had satisﬁed a high proportion of home
demand and no more in c.1300, had become a major exporter by 1500.
Just as the commercial growth of the thirteenth century prepared the way
for the structural changes of the ﬁfteenth, so developments before 1500 can
be connected with the trends of the early modern period. The divergence in
rural society between prosperous yeomen and labourers, innovations in farm-
ing such as the use of leys, the growth in occupational specialization (so that
by 1688 40 per cent of the population were employed in non-agricultural
jobs), and the rise of a ‘consumer society’ were all continuing tendencies that
are apparent in the ﬁfteenth century.
4 Of course there were many novelties
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, including the long-term conse-
quences of the Reformation, overseas expansion, new crops and industries,
3 R. H. Britnell, ‘Commerce and Capitalism in Late Medieval England: Problems of Description
and Theory’, Journal of Historical Sociology , 6 (1993), 359–76.
4 R. H. T awney, The Agrarian Problem in the Sixteenth Century (London, 1912); M. Spufford,
Contrasting Communities: English Villagers in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (Cambridge,
1974), 46–164; K. Wrightson, ‘ ‘‘Sorts of people’’ in T udor and Stuart England’, in J. Barry and
C. Brooks (eds.), The Middling Sort of People: Culture, Society and Politics in England, 1550–1800 ;
E. A. Wrigley, ‘Country and T own: The Primary, Secondary and T ertiary Peopling of England in the
Early Modern Period’, in P . Slack and R. Ward (eds.), The Peopling of Britain: The Shaping of a
Human Landscape. The Linacre Lectures 1999 (Oxford, 2002), 225–6; J. Thirsk, Economic Policy and
Projects: The Development of a Consumer Society in Early Modern England (Oxford, 1978).
Introduction 3
Dyer, C. (2005). An age of transition? : Economy and society in england in the later middle ages. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from cunygc on 2023-02-28 22:40:31.
Copyright © 2005. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
--- Page 4 ---
inﬂation, and population growth, but it is hard to draw a sharp dividing
line through the decades around 1500 and state that this marks the start of
a new era.
How and why did these changes come about? T owns were not in them-
selves the sources of new ideas and structures, as they had been born out of
traditional landed society. Of course the urban economy helped to change the
orientation of the whole country, by encouraging agricultural specialization,
for example, and creating numerous jobs in rural crafts and retail trade. The
ups and downs in population, which had in turn a strong inﬂuence on long-
term trends in prices and wages, provide the backdrop for economic activity,
but do not in themselves explain structural change. For example, when people
were scarce and land cheap, holdings increased in size. Making a proﬁt from
large acreages posed many problems, because corn was sold cheaply and
labour hired at great cost. When population rose decisively again after
1540, and the demand for land grew, the holdings were not necessarily
fragmented, but instead new generations of tenants cultivated them in
different circumstances, with cheap labour and high prices for the crops.
5
Social factors need to be used in interpreting these processes. The aristoc-
racy mattered a great deal: they are best deﬁned as all of those living on the
proﬁts of lordship, rents, and such revenues as court proﬁts, which brings
together the gentry (gentlemen, esquires, and knights) and the higher nobility
(barons and earls). Because of their very similar position as controllers of
landed estates, the higher ranks of the clergy and monastic houses must also
be included. Competition among different members and groups within the
aristocracy, and the shifting effectiveness with which they dominated the rest
of society, stimulated change. Above all, their retreat from direct cultivation
of the land, even among the gentry, gave opportunities for the peasants to
take over a larger proportion of agricultural production. Peasants can be
deﬁned as small-scale cultivators, and plenty of them were still working
holdings of 30 acres and below that ﬁgure in 1550. So many, however, had
acquired large holdings with 60 acres and above that they were emerging out
of the peasantry, and were called at the time yeomen, graziers, and farmers.
Many initiatives came from the ranks of society below the gentry. The
improvement in peasant conditions, including the disappearance of serfdom,
the reduction in rents, and the general removal of impositions, were made
possible by the scarcity of people, but were also demanded and secured by the
actions of peasants themselves.
6 New techniques, and much of the investment
5 J. Whittle, The Development of Agrarian Capitalism: Land and Labour in Norfolk 1440–1580
(Oxford, 2000), esp. 5–27, 173–7.
6 R. H. Hilton, Bond Men Made Free: Medieval Peasant Movements and the English Rising of 1381
(London, 1973), 233–6; id., Class Conﬂict and the Crisis of Feudalism (London, 1985), esp. 216–26.
4 Introduction
Dyer, C. (2005). An age of transition? : Economy and society in england in the later middle ages. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from cunygc on 2023-02-28 22:40:31.
Copyright © 2005. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
--- Page 5 ---
in enclosures, buildings, and mills originated with them rather than with the
aristocracy. We become more aware of a minority of people who do not fall
within the conventional social categories implied by such commonplace
modern phrases as ‘lords and peasants’ or ‘merchants and artisans’, or the
medieval notion that society consisted of warriors, clergy, and peasants. These
groups included the managers of production, such as the farmers of land and
clothiers, and the many middlemen, dealers, and mongers who organized
sections of the market.
The context for all of these changes was provided by the centralized
English state. Continental states have been credited with channelling and
directing economic activity.
7 In England we can ﬁnd monopolies and pro-
tection of special interests, but the country lacked the widespread enforce-
ment of controls and exclusive rights. In spite of the legal disputes over
property and outbreaks of violence, much of it aristocratic, the political
regime in England, compared with those elsewhere, offered some protection
for property rights and a secure environment for trade.
In the late ﬁfteenth and early sixteenth century England can be depicted as
a commercialized society, in which complex transactions, often involving
credit, could be conducted, in which farmers were cultivating on a large
scale, and in which towns offered a network of internal markets and access to
the international trading system. Did the population of England have an
individualistic, wealth-seeking outlook? Certainly, concepts of ‘improvement’
and proﬁt were familiar, and we can see in the arrangement of settlements and
houses a concern for maintaining personal privacy and the deﬁnition of
property boundaries. On the other hand, family loyalties, though dimin-
ished, still survived, and individuals supported communities by, for example,
contributing generously to the funds of their parish church.
This was not as expansive a society as we might expect. T rade grew after the
1460s, but until the great surge of inﬂation just before 1520 prices remained
low. Population expansion in theory should have been encouraged by high
wages, full employment, large landholdings, and proﬁtable industries. It was
held back, partly by high mortality, which tended to increase at the end of the
ﬁfteenth century, but also by the adoption of a custom of late marriage, and
by the celibacy of a minority. Can England be described as a capitalist society
in the early sixteenth century? For all of the movements in that direction, and
the prevalence of wage labour, much work was carried out by smallholders
employed for part of the year, and young people serving others at the
7 T . Scott, Freiburg and the Breisgau: T own–Country Relations in the Age of Reformation and
Peasants ’ War(Oxford, 1986); T . Scott, Regional Identity and Economic Change: The Upper Rhine,
1450–1600 (Oxford, 1997); S. R. Epstein, Freedom and Growth: The Rise of States and Markets in
Europe, 1300–1750 (London, 2000).
Introduction 5
Dyer, C. (2005). An age of transition? : Economy and society in england in the later middle ages. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from cunygc on 2023-02-28 22:40:31.
Copyright © 2005. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
--- Page 6 ---
beginning of their careers. Marx’s proletariat, that is, a numerous workforce
dependent entirely on wages in the long term, had still not emerged.
The sources used in this enquiry are necessarily varied. Those investigating
the economic and social history of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries are
aided by the remarkable series of records generated by the manor: surveys,
accounts made by reeves and bailiffs, and the rolls of the manor court and the
court leet. These can be supplemented by the deeds recording the property
transfers of free tenants, tax records, the judicial and administrative records of
the state, the registers of bishops, and the archives of the towns. Some of these
sources of information disappear or decline after 1400. This was not an
administrative accident. Detailed surveys and accounts were not needed as
lords ceased to manage their demesnes directly, or use labour services. The
manor courts lost power and functions. T ax assessment was left to local
communities to organize among themselves, out of sight of both the royal
authority and the modern historian. A great deal of administration was
conducted in a similar way, that is, informally, by word of mouth, and in
consequence without documentation. Accordingly, as this investigation
moves into the ﬁfteenth century it takes note of manorial records, but
makes use of the archives of new organizations such as fraternities and
churchwardens, and the leases, letters, and wills which increase in number.
Much information can be gleaned from the material evidence of buildings,
artefacts, and the landscape. Historians have to follow the movement away
from the lords to their former subordinates, but during that shift gaps appear,
as the new economic leaders kept few records. For that reason we rely on
indirect evidence, and must read between the lines of our sources. Inevitably,
much remains uncertain, and some of the questions that we ask cannot
receive a deﬁnite answer.
6 Introduction
Dyer, C. (2005). An age of transition? : Economy and society in england in the later middle ages. Oxford University Press, Incorporated.
Created from cunygc on 2023-02-28 22:40:31.
Copyright © 2005. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.