
--- Page 1 ---
The Political and Economic Effects of
Progressive Era Reforms in U.S. Cities:
Evidence from Newly Digitized Data ∗
Maria Carreri, † UCSD
Julia Payson, ‡ NYU
Daniel M. Thompson, § UCLA
August 29, 2022
Most recent version available here
Abstract
How did Progressive era reforms affect the lives of urban residents across U.S.
cities? The historical record is unclear. Some scholars argue that many of the pro-
gressive reforms were motivated by nativist and racist animus and explicitly designed
to benefit white business elites at the expense of disadvantaged groups. Others point
out that reformers often sought to improve urban living and working conditions and
expand access to education, which generated new opportunities for social mobility.
We inform this debate leveraging new data on 455 U.S. cities from 1900-1940 com-
bining i) dates of adoption of reform-style government, ii) deanonymized census data,
iii) data on political participation, and iv) detailed municipal budget data. Using a
difference-in-differences design, we document the impact of Progressive reforms on po-
litical participation, public goods spending, and the relative socioeconomic well-being
of black, immigrant, and working class residents vis-a-vis whites, natives, and business
elites. Despite finding that voter turnout decreased in reformed cities, we uncover only
a modest increase in earnings inequality across more and less advantaged groups and
no significant differences in expenditure patterns as a consequence of reform. This
approach provides a comprehensive portrait of the legacy of Progressive municipal
institutions and suggests that, on average, the reforms of this era may have exacer-
bated political inequality more than economic inequality, at least in the first decades
following their adoption.
∗Authors are listed in alphabetical order and contributed equally.
†Assistant Professor, School of Global Policy and Strategy ( mcarreri@ucsd.edu)
‡Assistant Professor, Department of Politics ( julia.payson@nyu.edu)
§Assistant Professor, Department of Political Science ( dthompson@polisci.ucla.edu)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 2 ---
1 Introduction
How did the municipal reform movement of the Progressive era affect the social and eco-
nomic lives of urban residents? A lively historical debate offers conflicting accounts as to
whether the Progressive agenda helped or harmed less advantaged communities, including
immigrants, African Americans, and the less affluent. Some researchers emphasize the fact
that reformers of this era sought to clean up government corruption, address the poor living
conditions of the working class, introduce basic forms of social insurance, and end exploita-
tive labor practices ( Bremner 1956; Davis 1984; Faulkner 1937). But other scholars have
pointed out that the Progressive movement was comprised primarily of white, Protestant,
and highly educated middle and upper-class Americans ( Weinstein 1969; Hays 1964; Buenker
1973). This research tradition concludes that racist and nativist streaks permeated many of
the movement’s goals, and achieving reform often required disenfranchising poor, working
class, and immigrant voters ( Bridges 1999).
The question of how harmful or beneficial the Progressive agenda was for these groups
remains unresolved in part because the historiography often focuses on the experiences of
particular communities in particular cities. Scholars have documented the rise and fall of
Irish machines in major cities like New York in the early 20th century ( Erie 1990), described
how Italians fared in Boston’s West End ( Gans et al. 1982), and analyzed the political
dynamics of Germans, Irish, and Poles in Detroit ( Zunz 2000). Bridges (1999) explores the
ascent of municipal reformers in the Southwest with a focus on the political participation of
the poor and racial minorities, while Stone, Price, and Stone (1940) describes the opposition
of working class residents to reforms in nine urban cities. While these rich case studies offer
nuanced accounts of who benefited from Progressive policies across specific local contexts,
to date we largely lack systematic empirical research on the overall effects of the Progressive
reform movement on the socioeconomic lives of urban residents across the U.S. 1
1For a review of the historical and sociological literature, see Fox (2012) and Leonard (2016).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 3 ---
We bring new data to bear on these old questions, including (1) de-anonymized census
records at the individual level, (2) newly digitized city financial statistics, (3) dates of mu-
nicipal reform which we hand collected from primary sources, and (4) estimates of electoral
participation at the county level. Collectively, our data cover 455 U.S. cities and span the
period from 1900 to 1940. We focus specifically on reforms that led to the adoption of a
council-manager or city commissioner form of government. Considered the most extreme
example of municipal reform (e.g. Holli 1969; Bernard and Rice 1975), this change was often
accompanied by the adoption of at-large elections and non-partisan ballots Banfield and
Wilson (1966); Bridges (1999) and serves as an effective proxy for when Progressives gained
control of the city government. In addition to being one of the most institutionally dramatic
reforms of this era, changes to the structure of government have been one of the longest
lasting Progressive legacies. We further discuss the theoretical and empirical rationale for
focusing on this particular reform in section 2.
Our research design exploits the fact that U.S. cities varied in whether and when they
reformed. This allows us to study how city life changed around the time of the reform
by comparing changes in socioeconomic and political outcomes of various groups in re-
formed cities vis-a-vis in cities that did not reform. In order to avoid bias arising from
heterogeneous treatment effects in staggered difference-in-differences designs (e.g. Xu 2017;
Goodman-Bacon 2021; De Chaisemartin and d’Haultfoeuille 2020), we follow the approach
proposed by Cengiz et al. (2019) and compare reform cities only to cities that never reform.
Importantly, since the timing of reform cannot be considered random, we then employ a
weighting strategy introduced by ( Hazlett and Xu 2018), which ensures that outcomes in
reform and non-reform cities follow similar trends in the pre-reform period.
We use individual-level census data covering the period 1900-1940 to construct measures
of the socioeconomic standing of several groups of urban residents. In particular, we com-
pare the outcomes of more advantaged groups—natives, whites, and members of the business
elite—to those of immigrant, black, and non-business workers. As our primary measure of
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 4 ---
economic well-being we use the average predicted wage earnings of each group, which we
compute following the procedure outlined in Abramitzky et al. (2021). We also analyze four
additional socioeconomic outcomes: the employment rate within each group, the share hold-
ing a local government job, the group’s literacy rate, and city-level occupational segregation
across groups.
Overall, our results show that the adoption of Progressive era reforms modestly increased
the earnings gap between more and less advantaged residents, but the magnitude of the
effects is small. The reform had no significant impact on the earnings of immigrant and
native residents. The earnings of business residents increased by 0.6 percent following the
reform, while the earnings of black and non-business residents decreased by 1.5 percent and
0.7 percent, respectively. These effects result in a statistically significant but relatively small
widening of the white-black and business-nonbusiness earnings gap. Consistent with these
limited effects on earnings, we show that reforms did not lead to systematic changes across
other socioeconomic outcomes. Crucially, we find that failing to account for the endogeneity
in the timing of reform adoption would significantly affect our estimates: an estimation
strategy that does not employ our weighting method would result in estimates that are
twice as large as the true treatment effect on the native-immigrant gap. While we observe
some evidence of distributional effects, we show that a wider earnings gap between more and
less advantaged groups was not the price for more city growth: we document that reform
cities did not experience higher aggregate growth in earnings, population, or employment.
We next examine the effect of reform on political participation. As we discuss in the next
section, there is little disagreement in the historiography that one of the consequences of the
municipal reform movement was to restrict popular participation in politics ( Martin 1933;
Banfield and Wilson 1966; Judd and Hinze 2018). Fox (2012) provides suggestive evidence
that, in aggregate, voter turnout in presidential elections decreased more in regions with a
large number of reform cities, and Hajnal and Lewis (2003) shows that turnout is lower today
in California cities that maintain various Progressive-era reforms. We offer new evidence
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 5 ---
that the adoption of reform-style government decreased turnout. Using historical data from
Clubb, Flanigan, and Zingale (2006), we show that turnout in presidential and congressional
elections decreased significantly in counties where cities reformed. This finding is consistent
with ample evidence suggesting that the reforms enacted during this period stripped political
power from immigrants, minorities, and poorer residents ( Holli 1969; Karnig and Walter
1983; Caren 2007).
Finally, we also show that the reduction in electoral participation did not go hand in
hand with significant changes in public goods provision. Leveraging newly digitized data
from the Financial Statistics of Cities Bulletins, we show that cities that reformed did not
decrease public spending, nor significantly change the allocation of government funds across
different types of public goods. These results suggest that, on average, the Progressive
agenda neither helped nor harmed disadvantaged communities to the extent suggested by
existing literature, at least economically. The well-documented reduction in terms of elec-
toral participation and descriptive representation of immigrants and working class residents
(Weinstein 1969; Davidson and Korbel 1981; Trounstine 2009) appears to have only modestly
hurt their economic prospects. In the next section, we describe the historical background of
the municipal reform movement and flesh out the theoretical debates at stake.
2 Historical Context and Theoretical Perspectives
The late 19th and early 20th century marked a period of rapid urban growth in the United
States. Cities spread beyond their original boundaries, and suburban communities emerged
thanks to the development of new methods of urban transportation in the second half of the
19th century ( Jackson 1987). This process of rapid urban expansion led to increasing ad-
ministrative challenges, and city government often struggled to provide urban residents with
adequate services ( Glaab and Brown 1967). Population growth and density were associated
with a rise in diseases, fires, water pollution, and overcrowding, which tended to dispropor-
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 6 ---
tionately impact the living conditions of working class and immigrant residents in urban
cores ( Trounstine 2018). In this period, political machines often emerged in American cities
as important providers of services for immigrants as well as poor communities generally and
facilitated economic and social integration in exchange for political support ( Schiesl 1977).
By the late 1800s, a reform movement began to emerge whose stated goal was to improve
city life and living conditions and eliminate the graft, corruption, and patronage associated
with machine-style politics ( Buenker 1973; Renner and DeSantis 1993). Part of the broader
Progressive movement in American politics, these municipal reformers sought to reorganize
city administration. As pointed out by ( Schiesl 1977) “Political reform appeared to be
a matter of running municipal government along the lines of the business corporation. ”
The reforms of this era centered around the introduction of the council-manager form of
government, the introduction of at-large elections and non-partisan ballots, and civil service
rules for municipal employees. However, while reformers often claimed that their agenda
was designed to broadly improve city governance and provide better services for all residents
(Stewart 1950), the movement combined contradictory impulses.
On the one hand, some historians have pointed out that the Progressive reform movement
was fueled primarily by business interests and upper-middle class whites who feared the
political influence wielded by foreigners, racial minorities, and poor people ( Merton 1968;
Fox 2012; Lane 1962). Although urban poverty shocked the sensibilities of Progressives,
many reformers believed the solution to such societal ills could only be achieved by reigning
in the power of the lower classes ( Weinstein 1969; Leonard 2016; Banfield and Wilson 1966).
To achieve their goals, reformers called for various structural measures that would limit the
ability of immigrants and ethnic minorities to exercise political power. While often enacted
under the guise of reducing election fraud and streamlining governance, reforms such as
voter registration, at-large elections, and non-partisan ballots made it more diﬀicult for poor
and minority voters to cast ballots and achieve representation on city councils ( Buenker
1973). Additionally, early accounts portrayed the political machines of this era as sources of
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 7 ---
political power and vehicles of upward mobility for immigrants ( DiGaetano 1988). Perhaps
not surprisingly, the most active opposition to these reform efforts came from immigrant and
working class voters ( Bridges and Kronick 1999).
On the other hand, subsequent research has demonstrated that most machines relied on
petty favors rather than encouraging immigrant communities to organize around their com-
mon economic and political interests. City machines often benefited only one ethnic group
at the expense of others (usually the Irish), and machine politicians did little to improve the
dangerous living and working conditions experienced by many immigrants ( Judd and Hinze
2018; Erie 1990; Trounstine 2009). Moreover, even as Progressive Era reformers sought to
weaken immigrant voting blocs politically, they also made important improvements to work-
place conditions, passed child labor laws, advocated for safer housing, and expanded social
services ( Fox 2012). According to Kirschner (1975), early scholarship on the Progressive
movement tended to sing the praises of urban reformers. “Their generous efforts to ease the
burdens of the poor by limiting the working hours of women and children, improving fac-
tory, housing and health conditions, and introducing rudimentary forms of social insurance,
according to this interpretation, mark[ed] them as path breakers to the New Deal and the
modern welfare state” ( Kirschner 1975).
Ultimately, while historians largely agree that the government reforms of this era resulted
in a reduced political participation of disadvantaged residents in cities ( Stone, Price, and
Stone 1940; Cassel 1986; Bridges and Kronick 1999), it is unclear what the overall socioeco-
nomic impact was. While Progressives were often blatantly suspicious of immigrants, racial
minorities, and the urban poor, their social policies may have still improved the economic
well-being of those communities both directly and indirectly. As Leonard (2016) summa-
rizes, “The great contradiction at the heart of Progressive Era reform was its view of the
poor as victims deserving state uplift and as threats requiring state restraint. The unsta-
ble amalgam of compassion and contempt helps explain why Progressive Era reform lent a
helping hand to those it deemed worthy of citizenship and employment while simultaneously
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 8 ---
narrowing that privileged circle by excluding the many it judged unworthy. ” The net effect
on the economic and social lives of more disadvantaged groups and, more generally, which
groups benefited when reformers gained power in cities, remains an empirical question that
is largely unresolved.
We shed light on this question by analyzing socioeconomic outcomes for various groups of
residents around the time during which a city switches to a council-manager or city commis-
sioner form of government. While the Progressive movement was characterized by a series
of reforms, we use the adoption of this new form of government as a proxy for Progressives
gaining control of the apparatus of city government. Beyond being one of the most dra-
matic and long-lasting structural reforms of this era ( Chambers 2000), this is one of the few
reforms for which the date of adoption was systematically collected for every municipality
across the country via the City Managers’ Association (now the International City Manage-
ment Association). Broadly, these reforms sought to remove power from elected mayors and
city council members and place policymaking authority with appointed city managers or
city commissioners. The goal was to streamline decision-making, increase eﬀiciency, and—
importantly—make it diﬀicult for machines and party bosses to engage in patronage ( Judd
and Hinze 2018). Existing historical work suggests that reforming the city charter itself
was the most extreme example of reform (e.g. Holli 1969; Bernard and Rice 1975), and the
vast majority of council-manager systems adopted other Progressive reforms at some point
(Banfield and Wilson 1966).
We emphasize that adopting reform-style government represents a bundled treatment
that was often accompanied by other reforms—such as non-partisan ballots and new voter
registration rules—and marked a shift both culturally and politically ( Bridges 1999). Some
of these Progressive reforms and policies likely had direct effects on the jobs and social lives
of less advantaged city residents. For example, we know that at-large elections and non-
partisan ballots reduced turnout in immigrant neighborhoods and led to a higher proportion
of occupational elites on city councils ( Fox 2012; Cassel 1986). Civil service reforms also
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 9 ---
made it more diﬀicult for immigrants to obtain municipal jobs via patronage, although
recent research has demonstrated that these concerns are likely overstated ( Kuipers and
Sahn 2022). We view the adoption of reform-style government as a proxy for Progressives
gaining power and being able to advance their agenda. Any of the effects we observe are
almost certainly the result of the multiple reforms that were part of the Progressive agenda.
The goal of this paper is not to isolate the impact of a specific reform, but to contribute
to the debate about the overall effect of the Progressive legacy on the economic and social
well-being of urban residents.
3 Data
3.1 Data Collection
In this paper, we study the effect of the adoption of reform-style government, which entailed
a switch to a council-manager or city commissioner form of government. The City Managers’
Association (now the International City Management Association) kept detailed historical
records of the list of cities that adopted this reform, along with the date of adoption. 2
Drawing from the Municipal Yearbooks of 1934 and 1940 and archival records available in
Rice (2014), we collected data on the year of adoption of reform-style government for the
1,100 largest cities in the U.S.
Data on socio-economic outcomes are constructed from individual-level census data avail-
able via the Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS) for the years 1900, 1910, 1920,
1930, and 1940. Every 72 years, the Census Bureau releases data at the individual level,
which allows us to track a variety of outcomes for different groups of urban residents as
cities experimented with new government institutions over the first half of the 20th century.
2Unfortunately, no systematic data exist on the year of adoption of at-large elections and non-partisan
ballots, which were two of the other common reforms of this time. We attempted to hand collect this
data from newspapers.com and by emailing local municipal archives but had little luck. However, as
described in Section 2, historians describe how these reforms were usually introduced after a transition to
the council-manager form of government.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 10 ---
Crucially, such comparisons are not possible with the more commonly used Census data ag-
gregated at the location level, which does not allow one to construct socio-economic variables
that vary both at the city- and at the group-level.
We combined data on the date of adoption of reform-style government with census data
for the 1900-1940 period. In total, there were 455 cities that appeared in both the census
data (for all five decades) and our dataset on municipal form of government, 186 of which
reformed during our sample period. Figure 1 shows the number of cities that adopted a
reform-style government in every year between 1900 and 1940. While the majority of reforms
took place between 1910 and 1920, cities continued to reform their charters over the course
of the sample.
Figure 1: Number of Reforms by Year
0510152025Number of Cities190019051910191519201925193019351940Reform Year
Notes: the plot above shows the year of adoption for each of the 186 reformed cities in our sample of 455
cities in the U.S. between 1900 and 1940. Blue lines highlight census decades.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 11 ---
Figure 2: Geographic Distribution of Reformed Cities
Non−Reformed City Reformed City
Notes: the plot above shows the geographic distribution of cities that reformed (in black) and did not reform
(in gray) during the period 1900-1940.
Figure 2 depicts the geographic distribution of cities that reformed at some point during
the 40 year period and cities that never reformed. Non-reformed cities were particularly
common in the Northeast and Midwest. Examples of reformed cities can be found in every
state, although they are particularly common in the South and Southwest.
To study the effect of the adoption of reform-style government on political participation,
we rely on data on voter turnout in both congressional and presidential elections from 1900
to 1940 available from Clubb, Flanigan, and Zingale (2006). Unfortunately, the smallest
administrative unit at which data on voter turnout is available is the county. We thus map
each city in our sample to a county, and assign to the city the turnout in the county where
the city is located.
Finally, to study the effects of reform on public spending, we digitized information on city
financial spending from the yearly Financial Statistics of Cities Bulletins provided by the U.S.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 12 ---
Census Bureau between 1902 and 1940. Our efforts build on work by Trounstine (2018) and
Janas (2022) who have also transcribed portions of these data. These reports were released
by the Census Bureau yearly from 1902 to 1938 and contain detailed information on the
revenues, expenditures, debts, and public service enterprises for all cities with a population
above 30,000 (until 1931) and then for all cities with a population above 100,000 (from 1932 to
1938). Importantly, the data contain information not only on the aggregate amount of public
expenditures, but also on the specific amount spent by the city for specific public services. Of
the 455 cities in the sample that we used for our socioeconomic outcomes analyses, 136 appear
in the Financial Statistics bulletins. For each available year, we digitized city expenditures
on schools, fire and police services, sanitation, public health, highways, recreation, hospitals,
as well as total municipal spending.
3.2 Variable Definition
To assess how different groups fared in reformed vs. non-reformed cities, we split the residents
of each city along several dimensions. First, we divide residents between immigrants and
natives: we define “immigrant” to include both foreign-born individuals and respondents
whose parents were born outside the U.S. 3 Second, we divide residents between African
American and non-immigrant white residents, relying on the RACE variable provided by
IPUMS. Finally, we use census occupation codes to investigate whether Progressive reforms
differentially affected business elites by dividing residents into those employed in business
occupations and those employed in non-business professions. Specifically, we follow existing
literature (Buchmann and McDaniel 2016: e.g.) and define “business” to include occupations
classified under the Managers, Oﬀicials, and Proprietors category according to IPUMS. 4
We use wage earnings as our measure of economic well-being of different groups. For each
of these groups, we compute the variable Predicted Log Earnings, which reflects the predicted
average wages earned by the members of the group. Specifically, while data on respondent
3For this classification, we rely on the variable NATIVITY provided by IPUMS.
4For specific details on the IPUMS variables used in each of our analyses, see the Appendix.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 13 ---
occupation exist over the course of the panel, the census only began collecting information
on wages starting in 1940. Following the procedure outlined in Abramitzky et al. (2021), we
first predict wages in 1940 based on occupation, age, and region. We then impute wages in
previous census years based on the same characteristics. 5 While this measure cannot capture
changes in earnings over time within an occupation or city, it reflects the local value of each
resident’s occupation had they performed it in 1940. Finally, we average predicted wages at
the city-decade-group level, and we take its logarithm.
To further explore the socioeconomic impact of reform, as well as to explore possible
mechanisms behind the relationship between reform and wages, we look at five additional
outcomes available in the Census data. First, we calculate the variable Employment, which
is the share of each group that is employed. This indicator is based on the IPUMS variables
labforce and classwrkr, and additional details about variable construction can be found in the
Appendix. Second, we construct the variable Local Government Job , which is an indicator
that takes a value of one if an individual holds a job in “local government” as defined by
industry classification in the census. Third, we use the variable Literacy as a measure of
cultural assimilation and human capital. It is an indicator that takes a value of one if
a respondent could read and write. Fourth, we construct the variable Group Population
Share, which is the share of each group among the residents of a city.
Finally, we calculate the variable Occupational segregation, which indicates the degree to
which workers belonging to different groups are clustered in different occupations. We employ
two standard approaches to measure segregation: a dissimilarity index and an isolation index,
both widely used measures in the literature ( Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor 1999; Iceland,
Weinberg, and Steinmetz 2002; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011). The two indices are defined
in a given city-year as:
Dissimilarity = 1
2
X
k∈K

immigrantsk
immigrants − nativesk
natives
 (1)
5We make predictions using only cities that had not reformed by 1940 to avoid projecting any consequences
of reform into the past.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 14 ---
Isolation =
X
k∈K
immigrantsk
immigrants
immigrantsk
immigrants − nativesk
natives (2)
where k is one of the K occupations present in that city-year. Both indices range between
0 (no segregation) and 1 (perfect segregation). The dissimilarity index can be interpreted
as the share of minority residents (or majority) that would need to switch occupations for
the minority share to be uniform across the labor market. The isolation index measures
the extent to which minority residents are only exposed to one another in their occupations
(White 1986; Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor 1999; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011).
With the exception of our occupational segregation measures, which by construction can
be computed only at the city-year level, we compute all our measures both at the city-
year-group level, to study the impact of reform on specific demographic groups, and at the
city-year level, to study the aggregate impact of reform on the socio-economic evolution of a
city. Additionally, in order to directly measure the distributional impacts of reform, we also
calculate the gap in each measure between the more advantaged groups – natives, whites,
and members of the business elites – and the more disadvantaged ones – immigrants, African
Americans, and non-business workers.
4 Empirical Approach
Our goal is to study the effect of reform across U.S. cities at the turn of the 20th century.
Our identification strategy exploits the staggered introduction of the reform across cities
shown in Figure 1 to study the effect of progressive reforms on three sets of city-level out-
comes: socioeconomic outcomes for different groups of residents, voter turnout, and public
expenditures. Census outcomes are aggregated at the city-year-group and are recorded ev-
ery decade. Turnout is measured at the county level and is available every two years for
congressional elections and every four years for presidential elections. Finally, city budget
outcomes are measured at the city-year level directly and are measured every year for the
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 15 ---
subset of cities for which this information is available. The standard difference-in-differences
specification for our setting would be the following
yct = γc + δt + βRef ormedct + εct (3)
where yct is the outcome for city c and decade t. Ref ormedct is an indicator variable that
takes a value of 1 after city c reforms. City and year fixed effects are represented by γc and
δt respectively.6 For census outcomes, we are most interested in whether city reforms affect
more and less advantaged residents differently. For every outcome, we always show results
for less advantaged residents (immigrants, black people, and non-business workers) and more
advantaged residents (natives, whites, and business people) separately, and we then show
the effect on the gap in that outcome between the two groups. Standard errors are clustered
by city.
Standard difference-in-differences regressions, like in Equation 3, are biased when the
treatment goes into effect at different times for different units if treatment effects change
over time (e.g. Xu 2017; Goodman-Bacon 2021; De Chaisemartin and d’Haultfoeuille 2020).
This is likely to be the case in our setting if reform affects the fortunes of various groups
differentially over the course of our panel. To avoid this source of bias, we follow the stacked
approach proposed by Cengiz et al. (2019) and compare reform cities only to cities that
never reform (“clean control” cities). As they propose, we create as many copies of each
never-reformed city as treatment periods in our data. For instance, when looking at census
data which is available for each decade during 1900-1940, we create four copies of never-
reformed cities, one for each decade highlighted in Figure 1 in which treated cities reformed
(1901-1910, 1911-1920, 1921-1930, 1931-1940). We refer to each set of reform cities and their
corresponding never-reformed cities as a “timing group. ’’ We then compare reform cities
only to the never-reformed cities in the same timing group by estimating:
6Across all analyses, we limit our data to cities for which we have data in all relevant years. This means
that the exact number of treated and control units varies across analyses.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 16 ---
ycgt = γcg + δtg + βRef ormedcgt + εcgt (4)
where g identifies the timing group, δtg represents period-by-timing group fixed effects,
and γcg represents city-by-timing group fixed effects. 7 Standard errors are clustered at the
city level. We can interpret β as the effect of reform under the assumption that reform and
non-reform cities would have been on the same average trajectory had neither reformed.
Of course, the timing of reform is not random: cities may choose to adopt a city manager
in response to changing socioeconomic conditions. For example, the reform movement gained
strength in the west at the same time as many people were moving to the region. To
address this issue, we re-weight our data to ensure that the never-reformed cities match
the average outcome for the reform cities in their timing group before reform ( Imai, Kim,
and Wang 2018). This approach is similar to the strategy proposed in Hazlett and Xu
(2018). Specifically, we use entropy balancing to find weights that minimize the difference
between the average reform and never-reform cities on all pre-reform observations of the
outcome while maintaining weights as close to 1 for all control units ( Hainmueller 2012).
This method is well-suited to cases with many treated units and few pre-treatment periods,
which is not the case with standard synthetic control methods for panel data.
To investigate pre-trends and the dynamic evolution of the treatment effect, we also
estimate a non-parametric event-study specification:
ycgt = γcg + δtg +
+3X
τ =−3
βτ Ref ormedcg × /x31[t = τ ] + εcgt (5)
where the coeﬀicients of interest, βτ s, measure the change in outcomes of treated cities
τ decades before or after treatment, relative to the decade preceding the introduction of
reform in each city and compared to the change in outcomes of pure control cities.
7Note that city-by-timing group fixed effects are effectively city fixed effects in our analysis using census
data. This is because, differently from our analysis using political and fiscal outcomes, which leverages
more granular time variation, in our census analysis each pure control city enters each timing group for the
same number of decades (all the decades in the 1900 to 1940 period).
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 17 ---
5 Reforms Had Minimal Socioeconomic Impact
In this section, we begin by presenting our results on socioeconomic gaps between more vs less
advantaged groups of city residents. Table 1 reports estimates from equation 4, which mea-
sures the impact of the reform on the evolution of earnings for different groups of residents.
Columns 1-3 focus on immigrants versus natives, columns 4-5 focus on blacks versus whites,
while columns 7-9 focus on residents in non-business versus business occupations. Overall,
we find that the reform had at most moderate distributional effects. The reform led to a 1
percent reduction in earnings for immigrant residents (p-value 0.095), while it had a negli-
gible impact for natives, resulting in an insignificant 0.007 increase in the native-immigrant
earnings gap (i.e. the difference in log earnings between natives and immigrants).
Table 1: The Impact of Reform on Earnings Across Groups
Predicted Log Earnings
Immigrant Native Gap Black White Gap Non-Business Business Gap
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Reform -0.010 -0.002 0.007 -0.015 0.002 0.017 -0.007 0.006 0.013
(0.006) (0.004) (0.006)(0.008) (0.005) (0.008) (0.004) (0.002) (0.004)
Num Obs 6,305 6,305 6,305 4,845 4,845 4,845 6,310 6,310 6,310
Num Cities 454 454 454 366 366 366 455 455 455
Outcome Mean 7.065 7.100 0.035 6.650 7.097 0.447 6.911 7.438 0.527
Outcome Stdv .137 .115 .114 .181 .12 .127 .157 .101 .112
City FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year×Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes: Gapis defined as the difference between the more and less privileged group (e.g. native - immigrant, white -
black, and business - non-business). Regressions estimated using all men age 19 to 50 living in cities from 1900 to 1940.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by city reported in parentheses. The mean and standard deviation of the
weighted dependent variable are shown in the table..
Importantly, we can show that a failure to account for the possible endogenous timing in
the adoption of the reform would result in significantly inflated estimates. A regression that
does not employ entropy balancing weights results in an estimated effect on the earnings
gap that is twice as large (estimate of 0.014, p-value 0.005). Indeed, as we show in Figure 3,
Panel A, cities that reformed were already experiencing an increase in the immigrant-native
earnings gap, relative to unreformed cities, in the decades leading up to the reform. When
we apply our weighting procedure, which ensures that reform and never-reformed cities are
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 18 ---
on similar trends before the reform, we estimate a significantly smaller effect of the reform
(see Panel B of Figure 3).
The remaining columns of Table 1 provide some evidence that the reform increased the
earnings gap between more and less advantaged residents, but the economic magnitude of
these effects is modest. The white-black earnings gap increased by 0.017 following the reform,
with the effect mainly resulting from a 1.5 percent drop in earnings among black residents.
The earnings gap between residents in business versus non-business occupations increased
by 0.013, as a result of a 0.7 percent decrease in earnings for non-business residents and a 0.6
percent increase for business residents. Appendix Figure A.1 presents event-study estimates
from equation 5 and shows evidence of immediate increases in the gaps in the first decade
after the adoption of the new form of government. To put these effects in perspective, the
average gap in log earnings between white and black in unreformed cities over the sample
period is 0.414, and the one between business and non-business residents is 0.506; thus, the
reform increased the gaps by 4.1 and by 2.6 percent, respectively, relative to the average
unreformed city.
Figure 3: Event Study Estimates for the Native-Immigrant Earnings Gap
-.05-.0250.025.05coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformEarnings Without Weights-.05-.0250.025.05coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformEarnings With Weights
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates from the model described in equation 5 for the gap in earnings between
native born and immigrants residents. The figure on the left uses raw data, and the figure on the right
employs balancing weights as described in Hainmueller (2012). Dotted line shows the 95 percent confidence
intervals.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 19 ---
In line with the small earnings effects uncovered in Table 1, we find small and mostly
statistically insignificant effects on other measures of socioeconomic standing. Figure 4
reports the coeﬀicients and 95 percent confidence intervals from estimating equation 4 for all
our additional socioeconomic variables (where coeﬀicients are expressed in standard deviation
units of their respective dependent variable). For each outcome, we estimate the impact of
the reform on the gap between more and less advantaged groups of residents.
If the adoption of reform-style government made it more diﬀicult for machines to offer
employment opportunities to disadvantaged residents, we would expect the effect of the
reform on their probability of employment in general, and on their probability of having a
public job more specifically, to be negative. As Trounstine (2006) observes, public sector
jobs in the early 20th century often paid better wages than private employment. If instead
less advantaged residents in cities that reformed were not particularly reliant on patronage
for employment, or if reforms did not significantly reduce their likelihood of employment,
we would observe no effect of the form of government on labor force participation. In line
with this second possibility, we find no evidence that the reform widened employment gaps
or gaps in the probability of holding a local government job. In addition, we find that the
literacy gaps between groups were not affected by the adoption of reform.
We use our segregation measures to investigate whether cities that reformed had higher
degrees of occupational segregation. Importantly, such clustering is not necessarily a neg-
ative thing for minorities. For instance, co-ethnic niches can capitalize on particular skill
sets and human capital attributes to provide employment opportunities to members of the
same communities ( Waldinger and Bozorgmehr 1996). At the same time, existing empirical
work finds little evidence that such occupational segregation benefits minorities in terms of
their earnings and educational attainment ( Wilson 1999; Model 2018). We do find some
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 20 ---
evidence that cities that reformed had higher degrees of occupational segregation, although
the estimates are imprecise. 8
Figure 4: The Impact of Reform on Other Socioeconomic Outcomes
EmploymentLocal Government JobGroup Population ShareLiteracySegregation - DissimilaritySegregation - Isolation-.4-.20.2.4Native - Immigrant GapWhite - Black GapBusiness - Non-Business Gap
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals from the model described in
equation 4. See section 3.2 for a description of the dependent variables shown on the y axis. Results in
table format are presented in Tables A.3, A.4, A.5.
Finally, we look at the overall share of each group in the population. We do this for
two reasons. First, worsening economic conditions for a particular demographic group in
the decades following the reform could lead to a decrease in that group’s population share
through a combination of increased mortality rates, lower birth rates, and negative net
migration rates. Second, we can use this variable to investigate whether any changes to
earnings are driven by changes in the relative size of the groups under study. If, for example,
the reforms in a particular city led to a reduction in the white population, we might expect
higher wages for this group because of lower competition for similar jobs. In line with the
8Note that our occupational segregation measure is constructed at the city level directly and it is equal to 1
by definition when the groups we look at are residents in business and non-business occupations, which is
why we omit this comparison from Figure 4. See the previous section for details.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 21 ---
small to null distributional effects we uncover, we do not find significant changes in the shares
of the city population belonging to any of the groups we study.
Despite the small distributional effects, the adoption of reform-style government may have
had aggregate welfare effects, leading to differential economic growth relative to unreformed
cities. While the absence of significant treatment effects for most of the outcomes and groups
in Table 1 and Figure 4 already suggests this is not the case, we can provide direct evidence on
the absence of significant aggregate welfare effects by re-estimating equation 4 on a sample at
the city-census decade level. Table 2 shows that the adoption of reform-style government was
not associated with differential changes to overall earnings, city population, or employment
trajectories in the decades following the reform. Similarly, the share of employment in local
government jobs and literacy rates did not change after the reform.
Table 2: The Impact of Reform on Aggregate Outcomes
Log Log Local
Predicted Total EmploymentGovernmentLiteracy
Earnings Population Job
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Reform -0.007 -0.007 -0.000 0.000 -0.001
(0.004) (0.046) (0.006) (0.000) (0.003)
Num Obs 6,310 6,310 2,112 6,310 5,048
Num Cities 455 455 435 455 455
Outcome Mean 7.025 23.349 0.801 0.011 0.952
Outcome Stdv .129 89.981 .074 .008 .043
City FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes:Shows estimates of the aggregate effect of the reform. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered
by city reported in parentheses. The mean and standard deviation of the weighted dependent variable are shown
in the table.
Overall, our empirical analysis paints a picture that is inconsistent with large distribu-
tional or aggregate effects of Progressive reforms. Our estimates show that, on average,
the relative socioeconomic standing of less advantaged groups was either unaffected (for the
case of immigrants) or only moderately worsened (for the case of African Americans and
non-business residents) in the decades following the reform.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 22 ---
6 Political Participation Decreased in Reformed Cities
We next examine how the adoption of reform-style government affected political participa-
tion. Here, the theoretical predictions are more clear-cut, and existing empirical work tends
to support the idea that the reforms of the Progressive era reduced democratic participation,
consistent with them being partially designed to weaken popular participation in machine
politics at the city-level ( Banfield and Wilson 1966; Buenker 1973). Table 3 reports re-
sults from equation 4, estimated on a panel that includes all presidential and congressional
elections from 1900 to 1940. While the treatment remains at the city-level, turnout data
are not available below the level of the county. The dependent variable is thus turnout in
the county where the city is located in each two or four year cycle (for congressional and
presidential elections, respectively). Odd columns present unweighted coeﬀicient estimates,
while even columns present coeﬀicient estimates from our preferred specification employing
entropy balancing weights as described in section 4.9 Standard errors are clustered at the
city level and Appendix Tables A.6 shows robustness to clustering standard errors at the
county level. Figure 5 presents event-study estimates from equation 5.
We find large negative effects for both congressional and presidential elections. When
a city reforms, turnout in that city’s county decreases by 2.045 percentage points in con-
gressional elections and 2.242 percentage points in presidential elections. The event study
estimates show that the drop in electoral participation is already visible in the first election
post-reform, and it becomes larger over time. These results are in line with Fox (2012), which
suggests that turnout decreased more quickly in the south and southwest than in the reform
resistant north in the early 20th century. Today, turnout remains 6 to 8 percentage points
higher in mayor-council cities compared to council-manager cities in California, according to
estimates by Hajnal and Lewis (2003). It is worth noting that coeﬀicients from the specifi-
9Election results are available for a larger number of cities that the 455 included in the balanced sample
of cities in our main analysis using census data and shown in Table 1. For consistency, Appendix Table
A.7 shows robustness to restricting the electoral analysis to the sample of 455 cities present in census data.
Note that 2 cities cannot be included because election results are available for one year only.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 23 ---
Table 3: The Impact of Reform on Voter Turnout
Turnout Turnout
Congressional Elections Presidential Elections
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Reform -3.366 -2.045 -3.313 -2.242
(0.584) (0.588) (0.595) (0.635)
Num Obs 425,586 383,754 137,929 137,929
Num Cities 1342 1342 1649 1649
Outcome Mean 53.364 48.780 60.642 55.449
Outcome Stdv 17.617 18.932 18.356 20.409
City× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights No Yes No Yes
Notes:Shows estimates of the effect of the reform on voter turnout. The dependent variable
is turnout in the county where each city is located in each two year period (for Congressional
elections) or four year period (for Presidential elections). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors clustered by city reported in parentheses. The mean and standard deviation of the
unweighted dependent variable are shown in column (1) and column (3) of the table. The
mean and standard deviation of the weighted dependent variable are shown in column (2) and
column (4) of the table.
Figure 5: Event Study Estimates for Voter Turnout
-5-2.502.55coefficient estimate-5-4-3-2-101234Elections since reformCongressional Elections-5-2.502.55coefficient estimate-5-4-3-2-101234Elections since reformPresidential Elections
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates from the model described in equation 5 for congressional and presidential
turnout with balancing weights. Dotted line shows the 95 percent confidence intervals.
cation not accounting for endogenous timing of reform, in columns 1 and 3 of Table 3, are
65% and 48% larger than coeﬀicients in columns 2 and 4 for Congressional and Presidential
elections respectively. Our results provide some of the first historical evidence at the local
level and using a before-and-after design that reform-style government decreased turnout—a
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 24 ---
widely assumed consequence of Progressive institutions ( Martin 1933; Banfield and Wilson
1966; Judd and Hinze 2018). Moreover, by showing that the reform led to a significant
shock to electoral participation, we can provide direct evidence that the mostly insignificant
socio-economic effects that we uncovered in the previous section are not simply the result
of a weakly specified treatment. The adoption of reform-style government mattered for the
residents of American cities, but the consequences were more pronounced in the political
rather than the economic sphere.
7 No Change in Public Expenditures After Reform
Finally, we examine whether and how the adoption of reform-style government influenced
the allocation of spending on public goods. The theoretical predictions here are mixed.
On the one hand, qualitative work suggests that the middle and upper-class supporters of
the Progressive movement favored investment in amenities like parks, libraries, museums,
and infrastructure improvements that would benefit downtown business districts (e.g. Hays
1964). But reformers also sought to expand access to education and social services (e.g.
Buenker 1973). And while municipal reformers also claimed that their efforts would make
city government more cost-effective and eﬀicient ( Schiesl 1977), existing empirical work shows
that overall spending is no lower in council-manager cities ( Lineberry and Fowler 1967; Ruhil
2003) and in fact is sometimes even higher ( Coate and Knight 2011).
Here, we examine how spending across several key categories evolved in reformed vs. non-
reformed cities.10 Following Trounstine (2018) and Janas (2022), we draw from the Financial
Statistics of Cities bulletins. Out of the 455 cities in our socioeconomic outcomes analysis,
136 cities also appear in the bulletins. For these cities, we digitized yearly information on
aggregate municipal public spending, as well as on the amount spent on eight categories of
10Given the higher frequency of city budget data with respect to census and elections data (yearly vs.
decennial and quadriennial/biennial respectively), and in order to be consistent with the weighting strategy
used in the previous analysis and described in 4, we here use entropy balancing to find weights that minimize
the difference between the average reform and never-reform cities only on the last three pre-reform years .
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 25 ---
services: schools, fire, police, sanitation, public health, highways, recreation, and hospitals.
This newly collected data allow us to paint a comprehensive portrait of how municipal
budgets were affected by the adoption of Progressive reforms.
Interestingly, we find few differences in the evolution of public goods spending between
cities that reformed and those that did not. Table 4 shows the results. In Column 1, we
find a modest and statistically insignificant increase in total spending of around 2% among
cities that reformed. These results point in the same direction but are substantively smaller
than Coate and Knight (2011), who find that per capita spending increased by just under
8% when cities switched to council-manager government in the 1980s and 1990s. Although
reformers of the Progressive Era frequently claimed that their proposals would cut costs and
improve services ( Bruere 1913; Taylor 1919), reformed cities did not actually reduce their
overall expenditures in the early 20th century.
Table 4: The Impact of Reform on Public Expenditures
Total School Police Highways Hospitals Fire Sanitation Recreation Health
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Reform 0.022 0.030 -0.010 0.013 -0.055 -0.000 0.026 0.055 -0.085
(0.018) (0.018) (0.024) (0.034) (0.142) (0.022) (0.032) (0.064) (0.046)
Num Obs 5,106 8,435 8,268 8,436 5,437 8,268 8,268 7,930 8,268
Num Cities 121 136 136 136 122 136 136 135 136
Outcome Mean 5955.3 2000.9 534.2 475.7 572.7 409.3 383.4 160.7 125.6
Outcome Stdv 25459.6 9897.4 2877.6 1467.3 2705.4 1532.9 2108.6 651.9 512
City×Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year×Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes: Dependent variables are the natural log of spending in each budget category measured in thousands of dollars. The mean and standard
deviation of the unlogged weighted dependent variable are shown in the table. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by city reported
in parentheses.
Despite the fact that reform coalitions were widely perceived as supporting public goods
like parks and libraries in the more affluent parts of their community, we uncover only a noisy
(but positive) effect of the reform on spending on recreation. In general, across individual
policy categories, we do not observe consistent patterns in the expenditure priorities of city
governments after they reform. Spending did increase modestly on education—the largest
expenditure category—but the estimates are not statistically distinguishable from zero.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 26 ---
The null results in this section offer some suggestive evidence as to why we fail to detect
meaningful increases in the socioeconomic gaps between different groups of more and less
advantaged residents in reformed cities. While the historical literature gives us reason to
believe that the municipal Progressive agenda may have disproportionately catered to white
and middle-class business elites, the actions of city leaders may not have translated into
observable increases in inequality if spending on public goods remained fairly constant. Of
course, we cannot observe how funding was allocated at the sub-city level, and case study
evidence suggests that reform governments tended to neglect poorer neighborhoods (e.g.
Judd and Hinze 2018; Beach et al. 2018). But the aggregate differences in the policy priorities
and overall spending of reformed vs. non-reformed governments appear to be quite small
overall.
8 Discussion
According to Judd and Hinze (2018), “The municipal reforms of the early nineteenth century
were designed to undercut the electoral influence of working-class and immigrant voters” (77).
What is less clear is whether these reforms reduced the economic power of these groups as
well. In this paper, we study whether the adoption of reform-style government affected
a variety of socioeconomic outcomes for immigrants, African Americans, and the working
class compared to native-born, white, and business elites. Using de-anonymized census data
to construct estimates of the wage earnings of city residents, we find that the earnings
gap increased only marginally in reformed relative to non-reformed cities. We also find
some modest evidence that occupational segregation increased, particularly for immigrants.
Crucially, a naive difference-in-difference approach would have uncovered a much larger effect
of reform on earnings inequality. After accounting for the non-random adoption of reform
institutions with trajectory balancing, we find that much of the difference in earnings gaps
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 27 ---
can be explained by differences in the wage dynamics of cities that reformed vs. those that
did not.
To show that these minimal effects are not simply the result of a weakly specified treat-
ment, we use the same empirical setup to show that voter turnout did decrease in counties
where more cities reformed. These results remain consistent even after employing trajectory
balancing and are consistent with existing literature suggesting that the reforms of the Pro-
gressive era reduced political participation. While we cannot state with certainty whether
this reduction in turnout disproportionately impacted working class and racial and ethnic
minorities, one consistent explanation for this result is the fact that Progressive reformers
tended to implement stricter voter registration and literacy requirements once they gained
power.
Finally, we find no meaningful differences in public goods expenditures across reform
and non-reformed cities. While we lacked clear ex ante theoretical predictions for these
analyses, we include these results to paint the most comprehensive portrait possible about
how municipal government evolved in cities before and after the adoption of Progressive
institutions. We hope that these newly digitized data from the Financial Statistics of Cities
Bulletins will be a resource for other scholars of historical political economy.
Together, these findings speak to important debates today about the contemporary legacy
of Progressive-era reforms—particularly for poor and racial minorities. Many cities still rely
on non-partisan ballots and at-large elections, and voter turnout remains much lower at the
local level ( Hajnal and Trounstine 2005). In some states, like California, a spate of recent
lawsuits have aimed to overturn these electoral institutions with the goal of achieving more
equitable representation for communities of color. 11
Overall, this paper provides a comprehensive portrait of the economic, political, and
public policy landscapes for a large sample of American cities in the early 20th century.
Most scholarly work on the effects of Progressive institutions has focused specifically on their
11https://www.commoncause.org/california/resource/california-municipal-democracy-index/
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 28 ---
consequences for participation and representation, and we have learned a great deal about the
conditions under which local institutions are more or less responsive to the interests of racial
minorities ( Engstrom and McDonald 1981; Davidson and Korbel 1981; Karnig and Welch
1982; Hajnal and Trounstine 2007; Trebbi, Aghion, and Alesina 2008; Trounstine and Valdini
2008; Marschall, Ruhil, and Shah 2010; Abott and Magazinnik 2020). The findings in this
paper suggest that the economic and social consequences of these reforms may also warrant
additional scrutiny in the contemporary political environment. To the extent that the design
of local political institutions exacerbates other types of socioeconomic inequalities, reforming
these institutions becomes all the more urgent. On the other hand, if the consequences are
largely confined to the political sphere, creating more equitable electoral institutions is no less
urgent—but such efforts are likely insuﬀicient to address broader socioeconomic disparities.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 29 ---
References
Abott, Carolyn, and Asya Magazinnik. 2020. “At-Large Elections and Minority Represen-
tation in Local Government. ” American Journal of Political Science 64(3): 717–733.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, Elisa Jácome, and Santiago Pérez. 2021. “Intergenerational
mobility of immigrants in the United States over two centuries. ” American Economic
Review 111(2): 580–608.
Banfield, Edward C, and James Q Wilson. 1966. City politics. Vol. 335 Vintage Books.
Beach, Brian, Daniel B Jones, Tate Twinam, and Randall Walsh. 2018. Minority represen-
tation in local government. Technical report National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bernard, Richard M, and Bradley R Rice. 1975. “Political environment and the adoption of
progressive municipal reform. ” Journal of Urban History 1(2): 149–174.
Bremner, Robert. 1956. “From the Depths: The Discovery of Poverty in America. ” New
York: New York University .
Bridges, Amy. 1999. Morning glories: Municipal reform in the Southwest . Vol. 60 Princeton
University Press.
Bridges, Amy, and Richard Kronick. 1999. “Writing the rules to win the game: The middle-
class regimes of municipal reformers. ” Urban Affairs Review 34(5): 691–706.
Bruere, Henry. 1913. The New City Government: A Discussion of Municipal Administration
Based on a Survey of Ten Commission Governed Cities . D. Appleton.
Buchmann, Claudia, and Anne McDaniel. 2016. “Motherhood and the wages of women
in professional occupations. ” RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social
Sciences 2(4): 128–150.
Buenker, John D. 1973. Urban liberalism and progressive reform . New York: Scribner.
Caren, Neal. 2007. “Big city, big turnout? Electoral participation in American cities. ”
Journal of Urban Affairs 29(1): 31–46.
Cassel, Carol A. 1986. “The nonpartisan ballot in the United States. ” Electoral Laws and
Their Political Consequences 226: 227–28.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. 2019. “The effect of
minimum wages on low-wage jobs. ” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(3): 1405–
1454.
Chambers, John Whiteclay. 2000. The Tyranny of Change: America in the Progressive Era,
1890-1920. Rutgers University Press.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 30 ---
Clubb, Jerome M., William H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale. 2006. “Electoral Data
for Counties in the United States: Presidential and Congressional Races, 1840-1972. ”
Inter-university Consoritum for Political Science Research https://doi.org/10.3886/
ICPSR08611.v1.
Coate, Stephen, and Brian Knight. 2011. “Government form and public spending: Theory
and evidence from US municipalities. ” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
3(3): 82–112.
Cutler, David M, Edward L Glaeser, and Jacob L Vigdor. 1999. “The rise and decline of the
American ghetto. ” Journal of political economy 107(3): 455–506.
Davidson, Chandler, and George Korbel. 1981. “At-large elections and minority-group rep-
resentation: A re-examination of historical and contemporary evidence. ” The Journal of
Politics 43(4): 982–1005.
Davis, Allen Freeman. 1984. Spearheads for reform: The social settlements and the progressive
movement, 1890-1914 . Rutgers University Press.
De Chaisemartin, Clément, and Xavier d’Haultfoeuille. 2020. “Two-way fixed effects estima-
tors with heterogeneous treatment effects. ” American Economic Review 110(9): 2964–96.
DiGaetano, Alan. 1988. “The rise and development of urban political machines: An alter-
native to Merton’s functional analysis. ” Urban Affairs Quarterly 24(2): 242–267.
Engstrom, Richard L, and Michael D McDonald. 1981. “The election of blacks to city coun-
cils: Clarifying the impact of electoral arrangements on the seats/population relationship. ”
American Political Science Review 75(2): 344–354.
Erie, Steven P. 1990. Rainbow’s end. University of California Press.
Faulkner, Harold Underwood. 1937. The Quest for Social Justice, 1898-1914 . Vol. 11
Macmillan.
Fox, Cybelle. 2012. Three worlds of relief . Princeton University Press.
Gans, Herbert J et al. 1982. Urban villagers . Simon and Schuster.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2011. “Ideological segregation online and offline. ”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1799–1839.
Glaab, Charles Nelson, and A Theodore Brown. 1967. “A History of Urban America. ” .
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2021. “Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment tim-
ing. ”Journal of Econometrics .
Hainmueller, Jens. 2012. “Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate Reweighting
Method to Produce Balanced Samples in Observational Studies. ” Political analysis 20(1):
25–46.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 31 ---
Hajnal, Zoltan, and Jessica Trounstine. 2005. “Where turnout matters: The consequences
of uneven turnout in city politics. ” The Journal of Politics 67(2): 515–535.
Hajnal, Zoltan, and Jessica Trounstine. 2007. “Transforming votes into victories: Turnout,
institutional context, and minority representation in local politics. ” Voting Rights Act
Reauthorization of 2006: Perspectives on democracy, participation, and power pp. 83–106.
Hajnal, Zoltan L, and Paul G Lewis. 2003. “Municipal institutions and voter turnout in
local elections. ” Urban Affairs Review 38(5): 645–668.
Hays, Samuel P. 1964. “The politics of reform in municipal government in the progressive
era. ”The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 55(4): 157–169.
Hazlett, Chad, and Yiqing Xu. 2018. “Trajectory Balancing: A general Reweighting
Approach to Causal Inference with Time-Series Cross-Sectional Data. ” Working Paper.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3214231.
Holli, Melvin G. 1969. Reform in Detroit: Hazen S. Pingree and urban politics . Vol. 4 Oxford
University Press.
Iceland, John, Daniel H Weinberg, and Erika Steinmetz. 2002. Racial and ethnic residential
segregation in the United States 1980-2000 . Vol. 8 (3) Bureau of Census.
Imai, Kosuke, In Song Kim, and Erik Wang. 2018. “Matching methods for causal inference
with time-series cross-section data. ” Working Paper. https://imai.fas.harvard.edu/
research/tscs.html.
Jackson, Kenneth T. 1987. Crabgrass frontier: The suburbanization of the United States .
Oxford University Press.
Janas, Pawel. 2022. Public Goods Under Financial Distress: Evidence from Cities in the
Great Depression. Technical report Working paper.
Judd, Dennis R, and Annika M Hinze. 2018. City politics: The political economy of urban
America. Routledge.
Karnig, Albert K, and B Oliver Walter. 1983. “Decline in municipal voter turnout: A
function of changing structure. ” American Politics Quarterly 11(4): 491–505.
Karnig, Albert K, and Susan Welch. 1982. “Electoral structure and black representation on
city councils. ”Social Science Quarterly 63(1): 99.
Kirschner, Don S. 1975. “The Ambiguous Legacy: Social Justice and Social Control in the
Progressive Era. ”Historical Reflections/Réflexions Historiques pp. 69–88.
Kuipers, Nicholas, and Alexander Sahn. 2022. “The Representational Consequences of Mu-
nicipal Civil Service Reform. ” American Political Science Review pp. 1–17.
Lane, Robert Edwards. 1962. “Political ideology: Why the American common man believes
what he does. ” .
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 32 ---
Leonard, Thomas C. 2016. Illiberal reformers. Princeton University Press.
Lineberry, Robert L, and Edmund P Fowler. 1967. “Reformism and public policies in Amer-
ican cities. ” American Political Science Review 61(3): 701–716.
Marschall, Melissa J, Anirudh VS Ruhil, and Paru R Shah. 2010. “The new racial calculus:
Electoral institutions and black representation in local legislatures. ” American Journal of
Political Science 54(1): 107–124.
Martin, Roscoe C. 1933. “The municipal electorate: A case study. ” The Southwestern Social
Science Quarterly pp. 193–237.
Merton, Robert. 1968. Social theory and social structure . Simon and Schuster.
Model, Suzanne. 2018. “The ethnic niche and the structure of opportunity: Immigrants and
minorities in New York City. ” In The” Underclass” Debate . Princeton University Press
pp. 161–193.
Renner, Tari, and Victor DeSantis. 1993. “Contemporary patterns and trends in municipal
government structures. ”Municipal Yearbook 60: 57–69.
Rice, Bradley Robert. 2014. Progressive cities: The commission government movement in
America, 1901–1920. University of Texas Press.
Ruhil, Anirudh VS. 2003. “Structural change and fiscal flows: A framework for analyzing
the effects of urban events. ” Urban Affairs Review 38(3): 396–416.
Schiesl, Martin J. 1977. The politics of eﬀiciency: Municipal administration and reform in
America, 1800-1920. Univ of California Press.
Stewart, Frank Mann. 1950. A Half Century of Municipal Reform . University of California
Press.
Stone, Harold Alfred, Don Krasher Price, and Kathryn Haeseler Stone. 1940. City manager
government in nine cities . Vol. 8 Committee on public administration of the Social science
research council.
Taylor, Frederick Winslow. 1919. The principles of scientific management . Harper & broth-
ers.
Trebbi, Francesco, Philippe Aghion, and Alberto Alesina. 2008. “Electoral rules and minority
representation in US cities. ” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(1): 325–357.
Trounstine, Jessica. 2006. “Dominant regimes and the demise of urban democracy. ” The
Journal of Politics 68(4): 879–893.
Trounstine, Jessica. 2009. “Challenging the Machine–Reform Dichotomy: Two Threats to
Urban Democracy. ” In The city in American political development . Routledge pp. 93–113.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 33 ---
Trounstine, Jessica. 2018. Segregation by design: Local politics and inequality in American
cities. Cambridge University Press.
Trounstine, Jessica, and Melody E Valdini. 2008. “The context matters: The effects of single-
member versus at-large districts on city council diversity. ” American Journal of Political
Science 52(3): 554–569.
Waldinger, Roger, and Mehdi Bozorgmehr. 1996. Ethnic Los Angeles . Russell Sage Founda-
tion.
Weinstein, James. 1969. “The corporate ideal in the liberal state: 1900-1918. ” .
White, Michael J. 1986. “Segregation and diversity measures in population distribution. ”
Population index pp. 198–221.
Wilson, Franklin D. 1999. “Labor-Market Opportunities. ” Immigration and Opportuntity:
Race, Ethnicity, and Employment in the United States p. 106.
Xu, Yiqing. 2017. “Generalized synthetic control method: Causal inference with interactive
fixed effects models. ” Political Analysis 25(1): 57–76.
Zunz, Olivier. 2000. The changing face of inequality: Urbanization, industrial development,
and immigrants in Detroit, 1880-1920 . University of Chicago Press.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 34 ---
Online Appendix
Intended for online publication only.
Contents
A.1 Data Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
A.2 Additional Statistical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
A.1 Data Appendix
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 35 ---
Table A.1: Summary Statistics
Variable Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max. N
Reformed City 0.409 0.492 0 1 455
Elections
Turnout Congressional Elections 53.354 17.62 0.3 98.900 383754
Turnout Presidential Elections 60.642 18.356 0 99.2 137929
Census - Earnings
Predicted Log Earnings (Immigrant) 7.057 0.132 6.5 7.509 6305
Predicted Log Earnings (Native) 7.124 0.105 6.607 7.468 6305
Predicted Log Earnings (Gap: Native - Immigrant)0.067 0.11 -0.47 0.409 6305
Predicted Log Earnings (Black) 6.707 0.157 6.11 7.543 4845
Predicted Log Earnings (White) 7.127 0.103 6.642 7.468 4845
Predicted Log Earnings (Gap: White - Black) 0.42 0.12 -0.442 0.874 4845
Predicted Log Earnings (Non-Business) 6.944 0.139 6.377 7.291 6310
Predicted Log Earnings (Business) 7.453 0.087 7 7.675 6310
Predicted Log Earnings (Gap: Business - Non-Business) 0.509 0.11 0.2 0.924 6310
Log of Finance Spending
Total 14.657 1.309 12.411 19.719 5106
School 13.565 1.287 11.155 18.812 8435
Police 12.249 1.406 9.384 17.861 8268
Highways 12.43 1.275 9.817 17.248 8436
Hospitals, Charities and Corrections 11.727 1.982 3.951 17.574 5437
Fire 12.328 1.197 9.832 17.03 8268
Sanitation 11.89 1.437 8.654 17.549 8268
Recreation 11.043 1.687 0 16.407 7930
Health Conservation 10.587 1.618 5.74 15.849 8268
Census - Other Outcomes
Employment (Gap: Native - Immigrant) -0.011 0.048 -0.225 0.295 2109
Employment (Gap: White - Black) 0.036 0.13 -0.37 0.883 1650
Employment (Gap: Business - Non-Business) 0.182 0.084 -0.237 0.532 2112
Local Government Job (Gap: Native - Immigrant) 0.002 0.01 -0.071 0.073 6305
Local Government Job (Gap: White - Black) 0.006 0.013 -0.149 0.083 4845
Group Population Share (Immigrants) 0.498 0.238 0.017 0.969 6305
Group Population Share (Black) 0.118 0.141 0.001 0.781 4845
Group Population Share (Non-Business) 0.93 0.02 0.823 0.987 6310
Segregation - Dissimilarity (Immigrant) 0.252 0.079 0.062 0.6 5044
Segregation - Dissimilarity (Black) 0.584 0.091 0.159 0.999 3876
Segregation - Isolation (Immigrant) 0.093 0.046 0.015 0.386 5044
Segregation - Isolation (Black) 0.26 0.119 0.007 0.653 3876
Literacy (Gap: Native - Immigrant) 0.055 0.057 -0.065 0.495 5044
Literacy (Gap: White - Black) 0.082 0.08 -0.021 0.639 3876
Literacy (Gap: Business - Non-Business) 0.039 0.041 -0.06 0.306 5048
.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 36 ---
Table A.2: Description of IPUMS Variables Used in Analysis
IPUMS Variable Description & Notes
LABFORCE A dichotomous variable indicating whether a person partici-
pated in the labor force. See EMPSTAT for a non-dichotomous
variable that indicates whether the respondent was part of the
labor force – working or seeking work – and, if so, whether the
person was currently unemployed. Notes: we combine this vari-
able with CLASSWKR to identify if an individual is employed.
Note that the variable EMPSTAT referenced in the IPUMS def-
inition above is only available for the years 1910, 1930, and
1940. However, LABFORCE alone cannot distinguish between
employed workers and unemployed individuals who are in the la-
bor force but currently out of work. Our variable Employment
takes a value of 1 if an individual is listed as being in the labor
force AND has a current occupation listed for the CLASSWKR
variable
CLASSWKR Indicates whether respondents worked for their own enterprise(s)
or for someone else as employees. Notes: in combination with
LABFORCE, allows us to distinguish between employed and
unemployed individuals in the labor force.
INCW AGE Reports each respondent’s total pre-tax wage and salary income
- that is, money received as an employee - for the previous year.
Notes: we use wages in 1940 to build a prediction model that al-
lows us to impute wages to previous years based on an individu-
als’ occupation, immigration status, age, and place of residence.
Used to construct our variable Predicted Log Earnings
OCC1950 Applies the 1950 Census Bureau occupational classification sys-
tem to occupational data, to enhance comparability across years.
Note: used to predict Log Earnings
NATIVITY Indicates whether respondents were native-born or foreign-born;
for native-born respondents, it indicates whether their mothers
and/or fathers were native-born or foreign-born. Notes: we de-
fine an individual as an immigrant if they are foreign-born or if
either of their parents is foreign-born
RACE Indicates whether respondents were white, African American,
Native American, Chinese, Japanese, or classified as “other”
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 37 ---
A.2 Additional Statistical Results
Figure A.1: The Impact of Reform on Earnings Gap
-.05-.0250.025.05coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformNative - Immigrant Gap-.05-.0250.025.05coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformWhite - Black Gap-.05-.0250.025.05coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformBusiness - Non-Business GapPredicted Log Earnings
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates from the model described in equation 4 employing balancing weights for
outcomes shown in Table 1. Dotted line shows the 95 percent confidence intervals.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 38 ---
Figure A.2: Event Study Estimates for the Native-Immigrant Gap in Other Socioeconomic
Outcomes
-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformEmployment-.006-.0030.003.006coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformLocal Government Job-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformGroup Population Share (Immigrant)-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformLiteracy-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformSegregation - Dissimilarity-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformSegregation - IsolationNative - Immigrant Gap
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates from the model described in equation 4 employing balancing weights for
outcomes shown in Figure 4 for native and immigrant residents. Dotted line shows the 95 percent confidence
intervals.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 39 ---
Figure A.3: Event Study Estimates for the White-Black Gap in Other Socioeconomic Out-
comes
-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformEmployment-.006-.0030.003.006coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformLocal Government Job-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformGroup Population Share (Black)-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformLiteracy-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformSegregation - Dissimilarity-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformSegregation - IsolationWhite - Black Gap
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates from the model described in equation 4 employing balancing weights for
outcomes shown in Figure 4 for white and black residents. Dotted line shows the 95 percent confidence
intervals.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 40 ---
Figure A.4: Event Study Estimates for the Business-Non-Business Gap in Other Socioeco-
nomic Outcomes
-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-112Decade since reformEmployment-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformGroup Population Share (Non-Business)-.06-.030.03.06coefficient estimate-3-2-1123Decade since reformLiteracyBusiness - Non-Business Gap
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates from the model described in equation 4 employing balancing weights for
outcomes shown in Figure 4 for residents in business and non-business occupations. Dotted line shows the
95 percent confidence intervals.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 41 ---
Figure A.5: Event Study Estimates for Public Expenditures
-.2-.10.1.2coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformSchools-.2-.10.1.2coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformPolice-.2-.10.1.2coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformHighways-.6-.30.3.6coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformHospitals-.2-.10.1.2coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformFire-.2-.10.1.2coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformSanitation-.2-.10.1.2coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformRecreation-.6-.30.3.6coefficient estimate-3-2-101234Elections since reformHealth
Notes: Shows coeﬀicient estimates from the model described in equation 4 employing balancing weights for
outcomes shown in Table 4. Dotted line shows the 95 percent confidence intervals.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 42 ---
Table A.3: The Impact of Reform on the Native-Immigrant Gap in Other Socioeconomic
Outcomes
Native - Immigrant Gap
Local Group Segregation
EmploymentGovernmentPopulationLiteracy Dissimilarity Isolation
Job Share
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Reform -0.005 -0.001 -0.011 0.001 0.008 0.003
(0.006) (0.001) (0.009) (0.003) (0.004) (0.002)
Num Obs 2,109 6,305 6,305 5,044 5,044 5,044
Num Cities 434 454 454 454 454 454
Outcome Mean -0.009 0.002 0.401 0.043 0.235 0.084
Outcome Stdv .047 .009 .232 .05 .072 .04
City FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes:the table above reproduces estimates shown in figure4 for native and immigrant residents. The two indices of segregation
do not refer to the gap because they are city-wide measures. The group population share refers to the share of immigrant men.
The mean and standard deviation of the weighted dependent variable are shown in the table.
Table A.4: The Impact of Reform on the White-Black Gap in Other Socioeconomic Outcomes
White - Black Gap
Local Group Segregation
EmploymentGovernmentPopulationLiteracy Dissimilarity Isolation
Job Share
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Reform -0.003 -0.001 0.000 -0.005 0.007 -0.004
(0.013) (0.001) (0.001) (0.007) (0.007) (0.008)
Num Obs 1,650 4,845 4,845 3,876 3,876 3,876
Num Cities 349 366 366 366 366 366
Outcome Mean 0.036 0.006 0.076 0.087 0.581 0.286
Outcome Stdv .13 .014 .019 .081 .086 .123
City FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes:the table above reproduces estimates shown in figure4 for white and black residents. The two indices of segregation do
not refer to the gap because they are city-wide measures. The group population share refers to the share of black men. The
mean and standard deviation of the weighted dependent variable are shown in the table.
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 43 ---
Table A.5: The Impact of Reform on the Business-Non-business Gap in Other Socioeconomic
Outcomes
Business - Non-Business Gap
Group
Employment Population Literacy
Share
(1) (2) (3)
Reform 0.002 -0.011 0.000
(0.007) (0.009) (0.003)
Num Obs 2,112 6,305 5,048
Num Cities 435 454 455
Outcome Mean 0.183 0.401 0.036
Outcome Stdv .082 .232 .038
City FEs Yes Yes Yes
Year× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights Yes Yes Yes
Notes: the table above reproduces estimates shown in figure4 for residents in
business and non-business occupations. The group population share refers to the
share of non-business men. The mean and standard deviation of the weighted
dependent variable are shown in the table.
Table A.6: The Impact of Reform on Voter Turnout – Robustness to County Clustering
Congressional Elections Turnout Presidential Elections Turnout
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Reform -3.366 -2.045 -3.313 -2.242
(0.753) (0.611) (0.674) (0.641)
Num Obs 425,586 383,754 137,929 137,929
Num Cities 1342 1342 1649 1649
Outcome Mean 53.364 48.780 60.642 55.449
Outcome Stdv 17.617 18.932 18.356 20.409
City × Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights No Yes No Yes
Notes: the table above reproduces estimates shown in Table3 with standard errors clustered at the county level.
See Table3 for additional table notes.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025
--- Page 44 ---
Table A.7: The Impact of Reform on Voter Turnout – Same Sample as Earnings Results
Turnout Turnout
Congressional Elections Presidential Elections
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Reform -4.350 -1.946 -4.887 -3.145
(0.922) (0.958) (1.006) (0.948)
Num Obs 122,139 58,674 33,965 28,403
Num Cities 453 402 453 447
Outcome Mean 53.444 49.059 60.816 56.543
Outcome Stdv 18.322 18.8 18.213 19.984
City× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year× Timing Group FEs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Balancing Weights No Yes No Yes
Notes:Reproduces results shown in Table3, restricting the sample to the cities also appearing
in Table1. The mean and standard deviation of the unweighted dependent variable are shown
in column (1) and column (3) of the table above. The mean and standard deviation of the
weighted dependent variable are shown in column (2) and (4) of the table above.
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4206025