
--- Page 1 ---
- -- 
From: Robert C. Allen, Enclosure and the Yeoman, 
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1992 
Introduction: Agrarian Fundamentalism and 
English Agricultural Development 
But, without any improper partiality to our own country, we are fully 
justified in asserting, that Britain alone exceeds all modern nations in 
husbandry. 
Encyclopaedia Britalz;rica, 1797, i 249. 
THE boast of the Encyclopaedia Britalznica was well founded. English 
farmers led the way in adopting new crops and better breeds of livestock. 
English corn yields were amongst the highest in the world and had 
doubled since the middle ages. Output per worker was 50 per cent above the 
next highest European country. At the end of the eighteenth century, British 
agriculture was indeed the most productive in the world. 
English agriculture differed from the European continent's in other, 
suggestive ways. The technical revolution in farming had been accompanied 
by an institutional revolution. The open fields were enclosed, and the small 
peasant holdings were amalgamated into large farms let to tenants who 
cultivated them with wage labour. By the nineteenth century, a unique rural 
society had emerged in England. This new society was characterized by 
exceptional inequality. English property ownership was unusually concen- 
trated. Rents had risen, while wages stagnated. By the nineteenth century, 
the landlord's mansion was lavish, the farmer's house modest, the 
labourer's cottage a hovel. 
The revolution in rural life was occurring in an increasingly commercial 
society. From the sixteenth century, London was one of the most rapidly 
growing cities in Europe. In the eighteenth century this dynamism extended 
to the provincial towns. From a rustic backwater at the end of the middle 
ages, England became Europe's greatest comn~ercial power in the eighteenth 
century, and the leading industrial nation in the nineteenth. 
Was there a connection between these events? Usually the answer is 'yes'. 
Improved farming, the modern agrarian institutions, the increase in 
--- Page 2 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 
inequality, and the First Industrial Revolution are often linked in a system of 
thought I call Agrarian Fundamentalism. It involves three claims: 
1. The technical revolution in farming was caused by the 'modernization7 
of England's rural institutions. The 'traditional' or 'feudal7 peasant farms 
and o en fields of the middle ages had stifled progress. Enclosures and large 
far 2 s created private property and capitalism; they extended markets and 
spread commercial attitudes. The result was a productive agriculture. 
2. The growth in agricultural productivity gave a strong boost to 
England's early industrialization-in some formulations it was an actual 
prerequisite. The manufacturing cities were built with savings from the 
agricultural surplus, they were peopled with labour freed from farming, and 
they were fed with the food produced by improved methods. The First 
Industrial Revolution was the result of the Agricultural Revolution. 
3. The increase in inequality was an inherent feature of the Agricultural 
Revolution. The growth in farm efficiency and the expansion of manufac- 
turing could not have been achieved in ail egalitarian society. The idea that 
there is a trade-off between growth and equity is one of the most entrenched 
ideas of Agrarian Fundamentalism. 
These ideas have had an enduring impact not only on the interpretation of 
English history but on that of the whole world. In the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries, peasant farming was seen as a stumbling block to the 
development of the European states. In the twentieth century, Agrarian 
Fundamentalism prompted the collectivization of agriculture in the Soviet 
Union and other communist countries. Analogous ideas have been applied 
by non-communist governments in many poor countries of Asia, Africa, and 
South America. For all those who contrast a traditional society with a 
modern one, for all those who argue that the traditional society must be 
overturned for development to occur, for all those who see inequality as the 
necessary price of growth-England is the classic case. For that reason, 
English history is of enduring importance. 
Enclosure, Large Farms, and Productivity Growth 
Few ideas have commanded as much assent amongst historians as the claim 
that enclosures and large farms were responsible for the growth in 
productivity. This was the consensus amongst the nineteenth- and early 
twentieth-century works on English economic and agricultural history. 
Toynbee (1 884: 88-9) accepted that 
the destruction of the common-field system of cultivation; the enclosure, on a large 
scale, of commons and waste lands; and the consolidation of small farms into large 
--- Page 3 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 3 
. . . wrought, without doubt, distinct improvement from an agricultural point of 
view. They meant the substitution of scientific for unscientific culture. 
Mantoux (1905) and Polanyi (1944) repeated these sentiments. Lord Ernle 
(1912: 351-2) concurred: 'Small yeomen, openfield farmers, and com- 
moners could never have fed a manufacturing population. They could not 
have initiated and would not have adopted agricultural improvements.' 
These views are still standard fare in the textbooks. Thus, Wilson's 
(1984: 33-4,262) survey of the period 1603-1763 contends: 
The full benefits of drainage and root crops were not possible without enclosure . . . 
The land must be freed from communal restrictions that held back the numbers of 
livestock and technical improvements. The purpose of enclosure was to do precisely 
this . . . Yields may have been nearly doubled. 
Further, 'peasant ownership had often meant stagnation, poverty, ignor- 
ance'. Mathias (1983: 55-6) agrees that the 
Enclosure of open fields, engrossing of smaller plots and holdings into larger 
agricultural units (units of production and tenure rather than units of ownership) 
established the basis of improvement. . . The break-up of the peasantry was the price 
England paid for the increased supplies of corn and meat to feed her growing 
population. 
There is always the worry that general texts are out of touch with the 
understanding of specialists, but in this case the fear is unfounded. Most 
leading agricultural historians have insisted on the importance of enclosures 
and large farms when surveying the causes of productivity growth. Thus, 
Clay's (1984: 114, 119) recent work dealing with the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries states that 'the form of organization which imposed a 
drag on productivity, was, of course, the open field system'. Moreover, 
'there can be no doubt that the larger and more commercially orientated 
farmers normally secured a higher output per acre than did most peasants 
. . . the continued aggrandizement of larger farmers at the expense of small 
must, therefore, have played an increasingly important part in the long term 
rise in agricultural productivity'. Chambers and Mingay (1966: 52), while 
admitting some possibility of improvement in the open fields, concluded 
'Nevertheless, enclosure was necessary because not all open-field villages 
showed much progress or efficiency and because even where there was 
progress there were limits'. Large farms were also necessary for advance 
since 'small farmers generally lacked the acreage and capital to undertake 
convertible husbandry or improve the quality of their stock and grasslands, 
and they tended to be ignorant and opposed to change' (Chambers and 
Mingay 1966: 45). Even Jones, who is otherwise sceptical about the claims 
--- Page 4 ---
for enclosure, believes 'the estate system was an essential part of the way 
new crops, livestock breeds and farm practices were diffused in England' 
(Floud and McCloskey 1981: i. 82). 'The agrarian organization which 
evolved in England made production more flexible and far more responsive 
to the market than a peasant system could have been' (Jones 1967: 17). 
qhile there is widespread agreement that enclosures and large farms 
productivity growth, there is a deep difference of opinion as to 
how they did so. This difference marks a cleavage that splits Agrarian 
Fundamentalists into two factions-Tory and Marxist. The Tories believe 
that large farms and enclosures maintained or increased farm employment 
while increasing production even more; the result was a rise in both yields 
and labour productivity. In contrast, the Marxists insist that the new 
institutions reduced farm employment, thereby raising productivity. These 
different views about farm operations have important implications for the 
analyses of the contributions of agrarian change to manufacturing 
development and of the causes of inequality. 
Arthur Young was a principal exponent of the Tory view. He was 
impressed by Quesnay's (1756, 1757) distinction between the grande 
culture and the petite culture and applied it to England. Young argued that 
more labour-intensive cultivation and more livestock raised corn yields. 
Such cultivation required large initial outlays of working capital. Young 
believed that large farmers had better access to finance than small farmers, 
so the amalgamation of farms led to increased capital intensity, greater 
employment, and higher yields. This enthusiasm for large-scale farming 
turned into a denunciation of peasant proprietorship after Young's tour of 
France. 
Before I travelled I conceived that small farms, in property, were very susceptible of 
good cultivation, and that the occupier of such, having no rent to pay, might be 
sufficiently at his ease to work improvements and carry on a vigorous husbandry; 
but what I have seen in France has greatly lessened my good opinion of them. (as 
quoted by Mingay 1975: 190) 
To their credit, however, he noted that peasant proprietors worked hard. 
'The industry of the possessors was so conspicuous, and so meritorious, that 
no commendations would be too great for it. It was sufficient to prove that 
property in land is, of all others, the most active instigator to severe and 
incessant labour' (Mingay 1975: 190). None the less, only large farmers 
practised capital-intensive agriculture. 'The husbandry I met with in a great 
variety of instances on little properties was as bad as can well be conceived'. 
Enclosure also raised employment and yields, according to Young, since it 
gave large-scale farmers more latitude to deploy their capital and thus 
allowed the benefits of large size to be fully realized. This critique of open 
r 
--- Page 5 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 5 
field farming has been elaborated by other writers, in particular, Lord Ernle, 
\ who identified several features that reduced its productivity. These 
included: (1) an overcommitment to corn growing, (2) the slow introduc- 
tion of new crops due to the necessity for group decision, (3) inadequate 
drainage and weed control due to the intermixture of property, (4) the 
spread of livestock diseases and the impossibility of selective breeding due to 
communal grazing (Ernle 19 12: 154-6). This indictment remains the 
standard fare in most modern writing on the subject. 
Marxist theory was prompted by the critics of enclosures who contended 
that they led to employment declines and depopulation. In 1516, for 
instance, Sir Thomas More had written: 'Each greedy individual preys on 
his native land like a malignant growth, absorbing field after field, and 
enclosing thousands of acres with a single fence. Result-hundreds of 
farmers evicted' (p. 47). How true these claims were we shall see, but they 
were undoubtedly common, and Marx based his theory of agricultural 
transformation on them. 
In spite of the smaller number of its cultivators [after the peasantry was eliminated], 
the soil brought forth as much produce as before, or even more, because the 
revolution in property relations on the land was accompanied by improved methods 
of cultivation, greater co-operation, a higher concentration of the means of 
production and so on, and because the agricultural wage-labourers were made to 
work at a higher level of intensity, and the field of production on which they worked 
for themselves shrank more and more. (Marx 1867: i8 17) 
Notice here two things: first, the insistence that large-scale, enclosed 
agriculture reduced employment per acre, and, second, the vague treatment 
of crop yields. This is an awkward problem for Marxist scholarship. 
Capital-intensive farming is still the usual explanation for yield increases. 
'Agricultural development was predicated upon significant inputs of capital, 
involving the introduction of new technologies and a larger scale of 
operation' (Brenner 1976: 49). However, Marxists need to avoid Young's 
unwanted conclusion that more capital meant more employment. Gone are 
the armies of turnip hoers. Instead,farmers buy'cattle and sheep to heap the 
land with manure. 'Animal production had to increase in relation to arable 
in order to provide manure and ploughing to counter the tendency to 
declining fertility of the soil' (Brenner 1976: 308). 
Agrarian Change, Labour Release, and Manufacturing Growth 
The second tenet of Agrarian Fundamentalism is that the increase in 
agricultural productivity led to the growth of manufacturing. There are 
many possible links-the provision of savings, the supply of food, the 
--- Page 6 ---
6 Agrarian Fundanzentn1isr.t~ 
extension of the home market, the release of labour-and they have all been 
worked into t*nalysis at one time or another. But labour release has 
always been the most central, probably because thinking on the subject was 
prompted by the concern that enclosure led to depopulation. Later I will 
show that there are other good reasons for this focus. 
In the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries no connection was seen 
between the depopulation associated with enclosure and the growth of 
manufacturing. The displaced farmers were assumed to become perma- 
nently unemployed. Wolsey's 1517 Commission on Depopulation reports 
that eighty people were expelled from Stretton Baskerville and that they 
'have remained idle and thus they lead a miserable existence, and indeed 
they die wretched' (Fisher and Jurica 1977: i. 117). In Utopia Sir Thomas 
More (1516: 46-7) asks of such people 'what can they do but steal-and be 
very properly hanged?' 
It was not until the mid-seventeenth century that a link was suggested 
between enclosure and manufacturing growth. The context was explaining 
Dutch commercial ascendancy and devising policies for England to emulate 
it. The political economists who pursued this question developed a two- 
sector model, in which the economy was conceptually divided into 
agricultural and commercial sectors, to explain the growth of trade and 
manufactures. In 1663 Fortrey applied this model to enclosures. He 
admitted that they destroyed villages and led to the conversion to pasture- 
'one hundred acres of which, will scarce maintain a shepherd and his dog, 
which now maintains many families, employed in tillage'. But he denied that 
the displaced farmers remained unemployed: 'Nor surely do any imagine 
that the people which lived in those towns they call depopulated, were all 
destroyed, because they lived no longer there'. Instead, 'they were onely 
removed to other places . . . and employed in the manufacture of the wool1 
that may arise out of one hundred acres of pasture'. Thus enclosure led to 
the growth of industry. 'The manufactures and other profitable employ- 
ments of this nation are increased, by adding thereto such numbers of 
people, who formerly served onely to waste, not to increase the store of the 
I 
nation'. Enclosure led to weaving-not stealing! i 
Fortrey's argument, with its assumption that enclosure reduced farm 
employment, fits comfortably with the Marxist theory of technical change 
in agriculture, and, indeed, Fortrey's argument was accepted without 
revision by Marx. 'The expropriation and expulsion of the agricultural 
population, intermittent but renewed again and again, supplied . . . the town 
industries with a mass of proletarians' (Marx 1867: i. 817). While this 
statement is often regarded as an inflammatory attack on enclosures, the 
intent of its seventeenth-century precursor was to defend them. 
--- Page 7 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 7 
Arthur Young was keen to argue that enclosure and farm amalgamation 
were all for the best. He had argued that these changes increased 
agricultural employment. Could he square the circle by also arguing (with 
Fortrey) that enclosure and large farms released labour to industry? He 
fou? a way by introducing population growth into the analysis of agrarian 
change. 
In Political Arithmetic, Young applied Fortrey's argument to the 
amalgamation of farms and began with the premise 'if the small farms are 
thrown into large ones, many of the people will disappear: let us (which we 
need not do) grant this fact' (Young 1774: 70). The conclusion, of course, 
was that the freed labour increased the production of non-agricultural 
goods and services. 'The fewer employed [in agriculture] (consistently with 
good husbandry) the better; for then the less product is intercepted before it 
reaches the markets, and you may have so many the more for manufac- 
turers, sailors, and soldiers' (Young 1774: 296). But, as the parenthetical 
qualification in the premise suggests, Young did not believe that farm 
amalgamation lowered employment. Instead it increased output. So he 
added, 'we may suppose more people who eat it'. Thus, farm amalgamation 
(and enclosure) maintained or increased farm employment but led to greater 
production of food. Population expanded in consequence, and the 
increment was employed in manufacturing. The theory that population 
expands as food production expands is now called Malthusian, but it was 
emerging in the work of Wallace (1753), Steuart (1767), and Young half a 
century before Malthus's First Essay. 
In Tory thinking still, population growth is the source of the industrial 
labour force. Professor Chambers has been the most forceful proponent. 'If 
agrarian change, as symbolized by enclosure, cannot be regarded as the 
chief recruiting agent of the industrial proletarian army, where did the new 
drafts come from?' The answer: 'The movement of population had taken an 
upward turn in village and town alike and provided an entirely new supply 
of human material' (Chambers 1953: 338). According to the Tories, the 
manufacturing work-force was the result of the 'natural' drive to reproduce 
rather than of social changes like enclosure or large farms. 
Income Distribution 
Tories and Marxists agree on the facts about income distribution during the 
agricultural revolution: labourers were so wretched in the first half of the 
nineteenth century that it is hard to believe they had shared in any advance. 
On the other hand, landlords raised rents as they reorganized their estates, 
so they prospered from agricultural productivity growth. The question is 
--- Page 8 ---
8 Agrarian Fundnrnentalisn? 
why inequality increased. The Marxist and Tory answers differ because they 
are elaborations of their differing explanations of productivity growth and 
labour release. 
Marxists believe that the growth in inequality had two immediate causes. 
The first was the concentration of property ownership that accompanied 
enclosures and farm amalgamations. 'The depriving of the peasantry of all 
landed property has beggared multitudes' (D. Davies 1795: 57). The second 
cause of rising inequality was the employment effects of large farms and 
enclosures. These reduced labour demand. Not only were most rural people 
becoming exclusively dependent on wage income, but the demand for that 
labour was falling. Enclosures and large farms were the cause of the rise in 
productivity, but they also caused low wages and unemployment for the 
majority of the population, and high rents for a rich minority. Inequality 
andpkoductivity growth were inextricably linked. 
The Tories dismiss the Marxist suggestion that the gentry and aristocracy 
might be blamed for the rise in inequality. They discount the concentration 
in landownership as a cause either by denying that it occurred or by saying 
that it cannot be blamed because the increase in concentration was lawful 
and thus also legitimate. Tories also deny that improved agriculture reduced 
labour demand; instead, they attribute low wages to population growth. 
Here Malthus comes into his own. He contended that the population would 
expand if the wage exceeded the 'subsistence wage', that is, the cost of 
raising a child and supporting him or her through life. Conversely, the 
population would fall if the wage were below the subsistence level. This 
demographic assumption implies that the population will converge to the 
size that maintains wages at the subsistence level. Suppose, as Tories do, 
that improved agriculture raises the demand for farm labour. Who gains? 
Initially, the wage rises; in consequence, the population expands. But the 
growing population drives the wage back to the subsistence level. The result 
is more wage earners but no increase in their standard of living. As more 
labourers work the land more intensively, output rises, but landlords receive 
all the gain as rent. So the Tory concludes that it was inevitable for the 
agricultural revolution to increase income inequality. That is why econ- 
omics was called the dismal science. 
A Counter-Tradition 
While Agrarian Fundamentalism has been the dominant interpretation of 
English agricultural history, there has been dissent. It began in England but 
has been strengthened by the confrontation of Agrarian Fundamentalism 
with the facts of agrarian change in Europe and more recently in Asia, 
--- Page 9 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 9 
Africa, and Latin America. This book weaves together and extends several 
strands of doubt and criticism. Some strands emphasize justice, others 
efficiency. 
The English critics of enclosure and farm amalgamation were persistent 
dissenters from Agrarian Fundamentalism. From the fifteenth century 
onward they claimed that enclosure and large farms were unjust-they 
enriched the large landowners at the expense of the poor. Sir Thomas More 
(1516: 46-7) objected that 'The nobles and gentlemen, not to mention 
several saintly abbotts, have grown dissatisfied with the income that their 
predecessors got out of their estates. They're no longer content to lead lazy, 
comfortable lives, which do no good to society-they must actively do it 
harm, by enclosing all the land they can for pasture, and leaving none for 
cultivation'. The same spirit of indignation led Cobbett to curse 'the system 
that takes the food from those that raise it, and gives it to those that do 
nothing that is useful to man'. (Cobbett 1948: ii. 42.) The Hammonds 
(1932: p. viii) assert that 'The main question for the historian is this: Were 
the poor sacrificed or not in the enclosures as they were carried out?' They 
answer that the poor 'were sacrificed and needlessly sacrificed'. 'Needlessly', 
since the more enclosures raised output-an Agrarian Fundamentalist view 
they accept-the greater was the potential for alleviating mass poverty. 
( What animated these writers was a sense of injustice and a sense that 
things might have been different. 'This state of things never can continue 
many years! By some means or other there must be an end to it' (Cobbett 
1948: ii. 55). This attitude is very different from that of Marx. While he 
incorporated the facts marshalled by the critics of enclosures and large 
farms into his theory of historical development, he thought that those 
changes were progressive and desirable. They created a rich society that 
would make socialism possible and, indeed, inevitable. 
The Marxist position highlights a weakness in the moral condemnation of 
enclosure. If the critics could say only that it was unfair to the poor, their 
criticism was vulnerable to the rejoinder that enclosures and large farms 
were necessary 'for the economy', that they promoted economic growth, 
however much they hurt some people. The second strand of thinking on 
which this book is based affirms that large farms and enclosures were not 
necessary for the technical revolution in agriculture. 
The leading eighteenth-century thinkers in England and France were 
hostile to small farms, but a counter-tradition emerged by the mid- 
nineteenth century. In England a pivotal book was W. T. Thornton's Plea 
for Peasant Proprietors (1843), which argued that small-scale owner- 
occupiers were more efficient than English tenant farmers. On the factual 
level, Thornton pointed to many examples of productive peasantries. On 
--- Page 10 ---
10 Agrarian Fundamentalism 
the theoretical level, he disputed the incentive arguments advanced to 
explain the superiority of English arrangements. He countered Young's 
(1771~: iv. 343-5) claim that 'high rents are an undoubted spur to industry' 
with the observation that proprietorship guaranteed the peasant the full 
return to his exertions and thereby provided a motive for improvement. He 
inverted Young's belief that capital-intensive agriculture was labour- 
intensive agriculture by emphasizing its converse-that peasant proprietors 
typically devoted their 'leisure' to investing in farm improvements. In his 
Principles of Political Economy John Stuart Mill drew on Thornton's 
critique as well as on the opinions of continental friends like de Tocqueville, 
who favoured peasant ownership, and travellers' accounts of improving 
peasants to argue that peasant agriculture could sustain a revolution in 
farming technique. 
We have surely now heard the last of the incompatibility of small properties and 
small farms with agricultural improvement. The only question which remains open 
is one of degree; [and] the comparative rapidity of agricultural improvement under 
the two systems [peasant proprietorship and English capitalism]. (Mill 1848: 154) 
The cogency of Mill's argument, however, was not enough to dislodge the 
fundamentalist consensus from English thought (Dewey 1974). 
By the late nineteenth century, debate about the efficiency of peasant 
agriculture had shifted to central and eastern Europe, where it was a critical 
issue. Did modernization require the replacement of peasant agriculture by 
capitalism (as the Russian westernizers believed) or could an advanced 
society be erected on a peasant base (as the more traditional thinkers 
contended)? If small-scale peasant agriculture was so inefficient, why did it 
persist in the face of competition from capitalist farmers? There were several 
responses. Lenin (1899, 1908) claimed that capitalist farms were indeed 
more efficient and, in Russia, were driving the peasants out of business. 
After the Revolution, the collectivization of agriculture represented the 
fulfilment of this analysis. On the other hand, in Germany and France, 
peasant agriculture was not succumbing to capitalist competition, and 
Marxists in those countries questioned the correctness of Agrarian 
Fundamentalism. Kautsky's (1900) explanation for the persistence of 
peasant farming harked back to Arthur Young's observation that French 
peasant proprietors worked harder than labourers. Another response denied 
that peasants spurned improvement. In 1939 Doreen Warriner published a 
comprehensive assessment of peasant farming in central and eastern 
Europe. She showed that peasants in Holland, Denmark, Switzerland, 
Bohemia, and western Poland realized crop yields like those in the United 
Kingdom. Slovakian and Hungarian peasants were not far behind (Warriner 
--- Page 11 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 11 
1939: 99). Throughout central Europe the traditional open field system had 
been abandoned. Only in some parts of Transylvania and Slovakia was a 
three-field course with one field of bare fallow still followed. In most places, 
new crops had been introduced, fallows eliminated, commons enclosed, and 
the village rotation abandoned. Consolidation, however, was rarely 
pursued, so farms were still split into many fragments (Warriner 1939: 10). 
'In general, in European conditions, there is good reason to think that 
peasant farming is efficient in the sense that the productivity of labour is as 
high as on large farms, and that peasant farming as such offers no hindrance 
to technical progress' (Warriner 1939: 7). President Gorbachev's decision in 
the 1980s to break up collective farms in the USSR and replace them with 
family farms held on long leases is belated vindication of Kautsky and 
Warriner. 
What of peasant farming outside of Europe? When Sir Arthur Lewis 
surveyed agriculture in The Theory of Econonzic Growth (1955), he began 
in Arthur Young's footsteps-'There is almost always some difference [in 
efficiency] in favour of large size [farms]' (p. 129)-but he also noted that 
peasant proprietors worked harder than others and so had an offsetting 
advantage. The novel part of Lewis's discussion was to confront the 
platitudes of Agrarian Fundamentalism with a new set of facts, in this case, 
those of Japanese history: 
The typical farm in Japan is still only between two and three acres in size; 
nevertheless productivity per acre on these farms is two to three times as great as in 
other parts of Asia. Productivity per acre in Japan increased by nearly fifty per cent 
in the thirty years before the first World War, and had doubled by the middle 1930's, 
without significant changes in the size of farm. (Lewis 1955: 136) 
Lewis rejected Agrarian Fundamentalism and concluded that peasant 
farming was not an impediment to rising agricultural productivity. 
Since the 1950s, the performance of peasant farmers has been systemati- 
cally studied in many parts of the world. A consensus has emerged that is 
the opposite of Agrarian Fundamentalism, both Tory and Marxist (Berry 
and Cline 1979; Booth and Sundrum 1985: 98-125, 186-99). First, 
production per se exhibits constant returns to scale-that is, the views of 
Young and Marx that large scale is more efficient than small is usually 
rejected in statistical studies. Second, many family members (e.g. grand- 
mothers) cannot find employment off the farm at the going wage, so they 
work on their farms, which are consequently cultivated more intensively 
than farms operated with wage labour. Young's observation about the 
hard-working French peasant has been repeatedly confirmed. Third, some 
of this hard work is devoted to capital formation (like drainage, terracing, 
--- Page 12 ---
12 Agrarian Fundamentalism 
ditching), so small farmers have more capital per acre than large farmers in 
so far as capital can be made by family labour. Fourth, the greater intensity 
of cultivation on small farms means that they produce more output per acre 
than large farms. The higher land productivity involves both a higher yield 
per sown acre of the main field crops and greater total production per acre 
overall due to the cultivation of additional, labour-intensive crops. Fifth, as 
purchased capital goods and fertilizers become available, small farms lose 
some of their advantage vis-a-vis large farms since the latter usually have 
access to cheaper credit. Again this was Young's view. As commercial 
capital goods become available, large farms use them more intensively than 
small farms. Under this circumstance, the large farms manage to reap the 
same yield per sown acre as the small farms; contrary to Young's view, the 
large farms still do not achieve higher yields. Moreover, small farms 
continue to produce more total output per acre by using otherwise 
unemployed family labour to produce vegetables and other high value 
crops. The Agrarian Fundamentalist strictures about large farms and 
productivity growth have been repeatedly confuted in the Third World. 
The other tenets of Agrarian Fundamentalism have given poor predic- 
tions in the developing world. The notion that agriculture contributes to 
manufacturing growth by releasing labour has been continuously refuted by 
the failure of industry to absorb the mass of unemployed or marginally 
employed workers. Instead, attention has shifted to promoting development 
by increasing the employment of labour in agriculture (Booth and Sundrum 
1985). 
The other prediction of Agrarian Fundamentalism-that development 
necessarily raises the incomes of rich landowners without benefiting poor 
labourers-has had a mixed record. When the concentration of landowner- 
ship has increased and technical change has displaced labour, then the 
English experience has been replicated. Some countries have avoided this 
result by land reforms that ensure egalitarian property ownership and limit 
tenancy. In such cases, income inequality declines as productivity advances. 
There are many examples of countries repeating the English experience, but 
the pattern is avoidable. 
The failure of Agrarian Fundamentalism outside of England raises the 
question of whether the doctrine is really a good description of what 
happened within England. Indeed, a few English historians have expressed 
dissatisfaction with the fundamentalist model, particularly the importance 
attached to enclosures. The path-breaking paper was Havinden's 'Agricul- 
tural Progress in Open Field Oxfordshire' (19616). It shook the fundament- 
alist consensus by presenting several examples of common field villages 
introducing grasses like sainfoin-making exactly the sort of changes that 
--- Page 13 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 13 
Young and Ernle thought impossible. Yelling (1977: 166-7) has expanded 
the evidence by presenting a few examples drawn from the 1801 crop 
returns of open field villages growing turnips. Kerridge (1967: 19) asserted 
that 'whether fields were open or enclosed has little bearing on the 
agricultural revolution'. While this research has attracted considerable 
specialist interest, its scope has been limited to enclosure, and it has not 
dislodged the fundamentalist consensus. 
An Alternative Approach to English Agricultural Development 
This book criticizes Agrarian Fundamentalism in both its Tory and Marxist 
versions. The truth or falsity of these views turns on factual issues like the 
effect of enclosure and farm size on cropping, employment, and yields, the 
ease with which surplus agricultural labour shifted into manufacturing, the 
trends in the distribution of landownership, and the movements of wages, 
profits, and rents. 
One way in which this book differs from others is that I shall investigate 
these issues statistically. My data sets allow open and enclosed farms, large 
farms and small farms to be compared. Arthur Young pioneered this approach 
in the eighteenth century, and I will reanalyse his data. (The results are a 
surprise since they contradict his views.) But Young's data are not sufficient to 
answer all of the questions, so many other data sets have been assembled. 
Young's data deal with the whole country, but the data I have collected 
deal mainly with the south midlands-roughly the stretch of country 
between Oxford, Cambridge, and Leicester. This is prime agricultural land 
and it has been at the centre of all enclosure controversies. There is enough 
geographical diversity within the region for different environments to be 
compared. There is enough uniformity to ensure that geography does not 
overwhelm social institutions. 
The investigations reported here lead to a rejection of Agrarian 
Fundamentalism. I contrast my conclusions with the received view by 
summarizing the argument of the book as follows. 
PART I. THE RISE OF THE YEOMAN AND THE LANDLORDS' 
AGRICULTURAL REVOLUTION 
I argue that there were two agricultural revolutions in English history-the 
yeomen's and the much more famous landlords'. Part I traces the rise of the 
yeomen and their subsequent elimination during the landlords' revolution. 
English rural society in the thirteenth century consisted of lords, free 
tenants, serfs, and cottagers. The Black Death of 134819 ushered in a 
--- Page 14 ---
14 Agrarian Fu?zdavlzentalism 
century of population decline that destabilized this social system. Labour 
mobility increased, real wages rose, and rents collapsed. Enclosure and 
conversion to pasture were the most creative seigneurial responses to the 
new order. Between 1450 and 1525, about one-tenth of the villages in the 
midlands were destroyed. These enclosures eliminated small-scale agricul- 
ture and represented an abrupt transition to capitalist relations. 
Paradoxically, these enclosures led to the consolidation of peasant 
agriculture in the remaining open field villages. The depopulation that 
followed enclosure so alarmed official opinion that the Crown began 
protecting peasant farmers. Legislation, investigation, and prosecution were 
tools, but the most effective response was the extension of property rights to 
peasants by the Tudor courts. Copyholds and beneficial leases became 
secure forms of tenure by which many small farmers held their land. This 
legal revolution ended the worst abuses and created the tenurial underpin- 
ning for the yeoman farmers who flourished under Elizabeth and the 
Stuarts. The yeomen were owner-occupying family farmers-true peasants. 
Their economic significance cannot be understated, for they were respons- 
ible for much of the productivity growth in the early modern period. 
Despite their progressive farming, the yeomen were eliminated in the 
landlords' agricultural revolution, which consisted of enclosure, the 
concentration of landownership in great estates, and the creation of large, 
leased farms. Since the sixteenth century, enclosure has been a favourite 
culprit in the disappearance of the English peasantry, although its 
significance has been hotly debated. Marxists have usually argued that 
enclosure involved the expropriation of peasant property by manorial lords, 
while Tories have replied that enclosure had little effect on the distribution 
of landownership. In fact, the relationship was complex. Early enclosures, 
especially those before the mid-sixteenth century, frequently involved the 
destruction of villages and the expulsion of their inhabitants as lords seized 
peasant land. In the seventeenth century, evictions were rare (because of the 
solidification of yeomen's property rights), but enclosure still usually 
involved a concentration of landownership and a venting of the population 
surplus to the needs of agriculture. In the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries, enclosure had little effect on landownership or population. The 
early enclosures are, therefore, good examples for Marxists, the later 
enclosures exemplify Tory views, and the seventeenth-century enclosures 
fall between these extremes. 
The real collapse of yeoman agriculture occurred in the eighteenth 
century, in open field villages as well as in enclosed. Many yeomen were 
freeholders, and they sold their property to great estates. Other yeomen held 
their land on copyholds for lives or beneficial leases for lives or long terms of 
--- Page 15 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 15 
years, and they lost their land when large landowners stopped renewing 
these agreements. These real estate dealings were due to the creation of 
modern mortgages which increased the propensity of great estates to buy 
land. 
PART 11. ENCLOSURE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH 
I begin my reassessment of the landlords' agricultural revolution with 
enclosure: agrarian fundamentalists contend that it was necessary for 
technical advance since they believe that open fields were inflexible and 
inhibited the adoption of new crops and the conversion of arable land to 
pasture. I investigate this charge by dividing the south midlands into three 
fairly homogeneous natural districts-the heavy arable, the light arable, and 
the pasture. The same management scheme maximized profits throughout 
each district, so I assess the performance of open fields and enclosures by 
comparing the diffusion of modern methods district by district. 
The diffusion of new techniques bears out the fundamentalist claim that 
enclosure led to agricultural improvement. In the heavy arable district, the 
tenacity of the soil meant that poor drainage was a serious problem. The 
solution was the installation of hollow drains, and, indeed, enclosed villages 
were far more likely than open villages to undertake this investment. In the 
light arable district, adopting the Norfolk rotation (turnips-barley-clover- 
wheat) and upgrading the breed and management of sheep were the bases of 
advance. Again, enclosure greatly accelerated the adoption of this system of 
management. In the pasture district, converting arable to grass was the key 
to progress, and enclosure led to a substantial increase in pasture. In all three 
districts, open field villages adopted the new methods to some degree, so 
Lord Ernle's charge that they were 'impervious' to new techniques is an 
exaggeration. Nevertheless, the open villages were far less innovative than 
the enclosed. 
It is a far cry from that conclusion, however, to establishing that the 
enclosure movement made a substantial contribution to productivity 
growth in early modern England. Crop yields and labour productivity (not 
crop rotations) were the two critical indicators of advance. Both about 
doubled between the middle ages and the nineteenth century. Enclosure, 
however, made only a minor contribution to these increases. 
I compare crop yields around 1800 in the three natural districts. In the 
light arable district, yields in open and enclosed villages were identical. In 
the pasture district, enclosed yields were perhaps a tenth higher than in open 
villages. In the heavy arable district, enclosure boosted yields about a 
quarter. Furthermore, most elements of capital-intensive agriculture made 
--- Page 16 ---
16 Agrarian Fundamentalism 
no contribution to the growth in yields. Yields were uncorrelated with the 
share of land planted with clover and beans, the main nitrogen-fixing crops, 
or with livestock densities, or the use of exotic or purchased manures. 
Convertible husbandry was unnecessary for the growth in yields. The only 
modern technique that raised yields was hollow draining, and its diffusion 
was indeed responsible for the growth of yields in the heavy arable district. 
Even there, however, open field farmers had accomplished three-quarters of 
the growth in yields between the middle ages and the nineteenth century. In 
the other districts, open field farmers accomplished almost the whole 
advance. Hence, when yields are used as the yardstick of progress, the 
enclosure movement played only a minor role. 
Next I consider employment and labour productivity. The impact of 
enclosure on employment is the main battleground between Tory and 
Marxist fundamentalists. I develop two methods to resolve the dispute. The 
first involves listing all the tasks in farming and determining their cost; by 
applying this accounting to the details of open and enclosed farming in each 
natural district, I can compare the total cost of labour and thus total 
employment. The second method uses the details of the several hundred 
'representative farms' surveyed by Arthur Young in his tours of the 1760s. 
Since he recorded farm employment, we can compare employment per acre 
for open and enclosed farms. Despite the radical difference in the 
procedures, the results are similar. Enclosure had little, if any, effect on 
employment when it did not affect the balance of tillage and pasture; when 
it led to the conversion of arable to grass, employment declined. These 
calculations provide no support for 'optimistic' Tory views. In pastoral 
areas, the Marxist story is closer to the facts. 
This result opens the possibility that enclosure accounted for much of the 
growth in labour productivity. Its effect, however, was mixed. In some 
circumstances, output per worker increased considerably, but in most places 
the gain was only in the order of a tenth. Even though enclosure often led to 
some decline in employment, labour productivity grew little since output 
also sagged. This result is not surprising in view of the small boost that 
enclosure gave to yields, the tendency of enclosure to reduce the share of 
arable, and the fact that tillage gave more output per acre than pasture. As 
with yields, the enclosure movement made only a modest contribution to 
the growth of labour productivity in England. 
Early modern discussions about output and employment were usually 
vague and inconclusive. On two issues, however, there was agreement: 
enclosure led to changes in cropping and farm methods, and enclosed 
farmers paid higher rents than open farmers. Both beliefs were true. Tory 
fundamentalists see these beliefs as connected-the rise in efficiency 
--- Page 17 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 17 
increased the farm's capacity to pay rent and thus accounted for the rent 
rise. My finding that enclosure made little contribution to productivity calls 
this conclusion into question and suggests that the rent increases repre- 
sented a redistribution of income from farmers to landlords. I investigate the 
issue by computing the Ricardian surplus for open and enclosed farms; this 
surplus is the difference between a farm's revenue and the income that its 
labour and capital could have earned elsewhere. Ricardian surplus indicates 
both the overall efficiency of the farm (in technical terms, its total factor 
productivity) and its capacity to pay rent and taxes. 
The agricultural revolution in the heavy arable district worked much as 
Tory fundamentalists suggest-enclosure led to investment in hollow 
drains, which raised yields. Ricardian surplus rose as well, and its increase 
matched the growth in rent. In this district there is no evidence of income 
redistribution at enclosure. In most other districts, however, the Tory view 
is inconsistent with the facts. In the light arable district, the growth in 
productivity was very small, and higher rents required some redistribution 
of income from farmers to landlords. The evidence for the pasture district is 
more difficult to interpret, but efficiency gains following parliamentary 
enclosures appear to have been minor, and there is very strong evidence that 
open field rents in the mid-eighteenth century were less than the value of the 
land. The balance of probabilities is that rent increases following enclosure 
in this district in the eighteenth century involved a considerable redistribu- 
tion of income from farmers to landlords. 
The investigations presented in this book do confirm the two reasons 
usually adduced for the importance of enclosure. It did lead to highly visible 
changes in land use and farming methods, and it did lead to higher rents. 
However, when I measure the effect of enclosure on yields and labour 
productivity, its importance diminishes, especially when the gains are 
contrasted with the growth in efficiency across the early modern period. 
Despite the enthusiasm of many landlords for enclosure, its contribution to 
agricultural productivity growth was small. 
PART 111. CAPITALIST AGRICULTURE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH 
If enclosure was not responsible for the growth in yields and labour 
productivity in England between 1500 and 1800, perhaps the other features 
of the landlords' agricultural revolution can take the credit; namely, the 
concentration of land in great estates, the concomitant elimination of 
peasant proprietorship, and the amalgamation of small family farms into 
large farms dependent on wage labour. The alternative, of course, is that the 
yeomen themselves were responsible for the rise in efficiency. In this section, 
--- Page 18 ---
18 Agrarian Fundamentalism 
I directly compare the contributions of the yeoman and capitalist systems to 
the growth in productivity. 
I begin with yields. Tory thinkers like Arthur Young claimed that large 
farms secured higher yields than small farms since the former employed 
more capital per acre than the latter. I investigate this claim with Young's 
survey of farms. These data show that capital per acre was either 
independent of size or declined with size for both arable and pastured farms. 
Young, himself, used his data to correlate size with yield. He believed they 
showed a positive relationship. In fact, the correlation is tenuous and too 
weak to explain the growth of yields in early modern England. Moreover, 
Young's yield data pertain to villages, rather than farms, and so are poorly 
adapted to investigate the correlation between yield and farm size. 
I use probate inventories to construct a more suitable sample for 
measuring the correlations between farm size, capitalization, and yield. This 
sample shows capital per acre declining with size. Of greater historical 
importance, the sample exhibits no correlation between size and yield. 
Large farms were not necessary for bountiful harvests. Moreover, the rise in 
yields preceded the eighteenth-century shift to large 'capital' farms. It was 
small-scale farmers in the open fields-the English yeomen-who accomp- 
lished the biological revolution in grain growing. 
Next I use Young's farm survey data to measure the effects of increasing 
farm size on employment and labour productivity. As with enclosure, Tory 
fundamentalists expect employment to grow with size, while Marxists 
expect the reverse. Again, the facts support the Marxist view. The 
employment per acre of men, women, and boys all declined with size. The 
decreases were greatest for women and boys. Eighteenth-century farm 
amalgamation rendered most rural women and children redundant in 
agriculture. 
Labour productivity increased for two reasons in the early modern 
period. Half of its growth was due to the rise in yields achieved by 
seventeenth-century yeomen. This increase did not account for England's 
exceptional productivity vis-a-vis the continent in 1800, for yields increased 
generally in northwestern Europe, raising output per worker throughout the 
region. Instead, England's superiority was mainly due to the declines in farm 
employment consequent upon the amalgamation of farms in the eighteenth 
century. 
The investigations reported here imply a radical shift in our understand- 
ing of productivity growth in early modern England. The seventeenth- 
century yeomen were the decisive contributors. They accomplished most of 
the growth in yields and about half of the rise in labour productivity over 
the period. The main contribution of the landlords' agricultural revolution 
--- Page 19 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 19 
was a further shedding of labour in the eighteenth century. While this did 
push labour productivity to record levels, it was of secondary importance 
compared to the achievement of the yeomen. 
PART IV. AGRARIAN CHANGE AND INDUSTRIALIZATION 
Productivity growth in agriculture is important since it may lay the basis for 
industrial advance. In this section I contrast the contributions of the 
yeomen's and landlords' revolutions in this regard. 
One way that agricultural productivity growth can aid industrialization 
and economic growth is by providing savings to finance manufacturing 
investment. In England, most of the productivity gains of the agricultural 
revolution accrued to the large landowners as rent increases. Instead of 
saving, however, they were net borrowers and spent their fortunes on stately 
homes and elegant living. Agriculture made little contribution towards 
promoting industrial capital formation. 
The main contribution of the agricultural revolution to England's 
economic growth was, therefore, its immediate impact on the national 
income. There were two ways in which the rise in agricultural efficiency 
increased gross domestic product (GDP). The first was by expanding 
agricultural output; the second was by releasing labour to other sectors. In 
the seventeenth century, agrarian change made contributions in both ways. 
The expansion in agricultural output was the more important, and it was 
the achievement of the yeomen's agricultural revolution. A reduction in farm 
employment was a consequence of the early phase of the landlords' 
agricultural revolution. Most of the people forced out of agriculture left the 
midlands and swelled the population of the Metropolis where their 
employment expanded output in commerce and manufacturing. This 
reallocation of labour did boost GDP, but the rise was smaller than the 
increase attributable to the yeomen's agricultural revolution. 
Enclosures and farm amalgamation were more extensive in the eighteenth 
century, but they made less of a contribution to the increase in national 
income. Technical change no longer raised yields, so it did not directly raise 
agricultural output and GDP. Enclosures and farm amalgamations reduced 
employment per acre, but the labour released was not successfully re- 
employed in manufacturing. By the early nineteenth century, the agricul- 
tural revolution was producing paupers-not proletarians. Samuel 
Fortrey's dream of industrious weavers gave way to Thomas More's 
nightmare of thieves. Some of them, indeed, were hanged; many were 
transported to Australia. The rise in farm productivity through labour 
release, therefore, did not translate into a rise in the national income. The 
--- Page 20 ---
20 Agrarian Fundamentalism 
overall impact of agricultural change on GDP was very small in the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The landlords' agricultural revolution, 
in its most intense phase, made little contribution to economic growth. 
PART V. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE BENEFITS OF TECHNICAL PROGRESS 
Agricultural productivity growth created the potential to raise the incomes 
of all people in early modern England. In fact, the rich were the main 
beneficiaries. 
Price changes were a principal avenue by which the benefits of 
productivity growth were distributed. Thus, consumers would have gained 
had food prices fallen. Indeed, such a development would have reduced the 
inequality of real incomes since the poor spent a higher share of their 
income on food than did the rich. However, real agricultural prices rose in 
England between the late middle ages and the nineteenth century. This trend 
increased inequality by reducing the real incomes of the poor relative to the 
rich. 
The gains from productivity growth accrued to agriculturalists as rising 
incomes. Labourers, however, did not gain since the real wage fell, then 
remained low, as productivity increased. Likewise, farmers (as the owners 
of working capital) did not gain since the real rental price of livestock and 
equipment was trendless from the fifteenth to the nineteenth century. All the 
benefits of rising productivity accrued to landlords-real rents increased 
about sevenfold between 1450 and 1850. 
The tendency to increased inequality was least pronounced during the 
yeomen's agricultural revolution in the second half of the seventeenth 
century. The rise in crop yields ensured that the real price of agricultural 
products did not rise. Likewise, the preservation of farm employment 
stabilized the real wage. In the eighteenth century, these trends reversed 
and inequality grew. The cessation of output growth meant that the real 
prices of farm products increased. The decline in labour demand increased 
unemployment and lowered agricultural labour income. As a result rents 
increased sharply during the main phase of the landlords' agricultural 
revolution. 
If the ownership of property had been equally distributed, the fact that 
productivity growth raised rents would not have increased inequality. But 
landownership was highly concentrated and became even more so over the 
early modern period. Most of the income generated by agricultural 
productivity growth, therefore, accrued to the gentry and aristocracy. 
--- Page 21 ---
Agrarian Fundamentalism 21 
Two Agricultural Revolutions 
There were two agricultural revolutions in English history-the yeomen's 
and the landlords'. 
The yeomen's revolution occurred mainly in the seventeenth century, 
although its legal basis was laid in the sixteenth. This revolution was 
marked by a doubling of corn yields; it raised England's national income, 
and the benefits were distributed widely. Small farmers who held their land 
on copyholds and beneficial leases gained as land values increased. 
Labourers held their own since employment was maintained. 
The landlords' revolution consisted of enclosure and farm amalgamation. 
This reorganization began in the fifteenth century but occurred mainly in 
the eighteenth. The early enclosures increased farm output and released 
labour when the population was low, so they probably contributed to a rise 
in GDP-a rise that accrued mainly to large landlords through higher rents. 
Enclosure and the growth in farm size in the eighteenth century did not 
increase output-they reduced farm employment. The released labourers 
did not raise the national income since they were not re-employed in 
manufacturing. The only gainers were large landlords. 
The conclusion is unavoidable-most English men and women would 
have been better off had the landlords' revolution never occurred. 