
--- Page 72 ---
initial group of industrial pilot projects.
22
 
Although England, France and the United States
were much visited, Germany was the favourite destination.
 
Ito Hirobumi, Japan’s first (and
multiple) prime minister, spent two months in Berlin in 1882, meeting the Iron Chancellor,
Otto von Bismarck.
 
Among the second generation of Meiji leaders, several studied in
Germany for periods of years.
 
Hirata Tosuke, Minister of Agriculture and Commerce and
then Interior Minister in the 1890s, was the first Japanese to obtain a German doctorate, in
1875; Hirata also undertook one of several translations of List into Japanese.
23
 
Kanai
Noboru, who studied in Germany in the 1880s under almost all the key scholars of the
Historical School, returned to a professorship at Tokyo Imperial University and trained a
generation of bureaucrats at what remains Japan’s most elite school for government officials.
Several important German scholars were also recruited to teach in Japan and to advise the
government.
The diaries and other papers of leading Japanese statesmen contain repeated references to
the suitability of Prussian ideas and institutions for their country.
 
The historian Kenneth Pyle
called the notion of copying the development trajectories of advanced states the ‘
idée fixe
’ of
Meiji development.
24
 
T
he economic historian Robert Wade noted that in the Japanese
language the concept was often communicated in the metaphor that all developing countries
and their economies are ultimately ‘descending the same stretch of the river’.
 
This was the
Historical School message writ large.
Beg, borrow, steal …
Meiji Japan began to implement its industrial policy in the 1870s just as Prussia had in the late
eighteenth c
entury, by opening a series of state pilot factories in basic industries.
 
Most of these
lost money but, as in Prussia, the government was prepared to subsidise an initial learning
process at a time when private investors were unwilling to risk their capital in poorly
understood businesses.
 
Just as the Prussians had bought and copied English machines and
convinced English engineers to work for them – despite British criminal laws which forbade
this – Japan re-engineered imported machinery and hired foreigners with essential technical
knowledge.
 
There were 400 foreigners at work in Japan within a decade of the Meiji
Restoration and this number rose to several thousand.
Britain abolished her last legal restraints on the export of manufacturing machinery in 1843,
and governments and town guilds in the rest of Europe began to lift similar restrictions, so the
global availability of technology was less constrained for Meiji Japan than it had been for
continental European states.
25
 
The Japanese were pressured into signing international patent
and copyright agreements, but they ignored them.
 
‘That [the agreements] posed no effective
obstacle to Japanese copying of foreign designs,’ wrote the Japan historian William Lockwood,
‘was a constant complaint of manufacturers abroad.’
26
 
As would be the case again and again
in rising states in post-Second World War east Asia, Meiji Japanese knock-offs were typically
low-cost, low-tech product adaptations which were mocked as cheap and tacky by foreigners.
In fact, they were usually goods evolved with Japan’s tight-fisted rural consumers in mind –
the key early market.
 
Less frequently, foreign technology was copied and cleverly upgraded, as
with the Toyoda automatic loom, which was sold back to the home of modern textiles,
Britain.
27
 
Like Prussia, Japan discouraged foreigners from making direct investments in its
72
--- Page 73 ---
economy.
In the 1880s, the Japanese government sold off most of its pilot firms – in businesses like
mining, cotton spinning, woollen thread production, silk reeling, shipbuilding, plate glass and
cement – to private entrepreneurs at low prices.
 
Subsequently, many of the ventures became
highly profitable.
28
 
In 1889, a modified Prussian constitution was promulgated in Japan
which put much of the business of actually running government in the hands of a professional
bureaucracy.
29
 
These bureaucrats then nurtured an early generation of entrepreneurs, not
only
 
through the sales of pilot factories, but also with licences to operate firms that faced
limited competition – oligopolies – and with minimum profit guarantees in mining, shipping
and infrastructure projects.
 
Builders of railways, for instance, were guaranteed a return of not
less than 7 per cent.
 
Mitsubishi, founded by a politically well-connected trader, Iwasaki
Yataro, in 1870, was given government vessels and huge subsidies until the firm was finally
able to break the foreign stranglehold on shipping.
 
Exports, which at the outset were mainly
raw silk and the simple manufactures of small-scale firms, began to take off from their low
base, rising eight times between 1880 and 1913.
… and scale up
In Germany, there had been little real industrial innovation until the final stages of the
country’s ascent to modernity, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
 
This
proved even more the case in Japan.
 
The Prussian, and then German, key to progress had been
to increase the scale of investments, often by merging firms, while making only incremental
modifications to old technologies.
 
The industrial techniques Germany employed during take-
off were mostly developed in England and France: the Gilchrist–Thomas system for
producing phosphorous-free pig iron, the commercial production technique for aniline
dyestuffs, and an assortment of technologies for electricity generation and transmission.
 
The
unprece
​
dented scale of Germany’s output meant that unit costs became l ower than t hose of
established industrial powers like Britain, whose earlier investments in smaller-scale plants
became a liability.
 
Germany’s economies of scale were such that its iron and steel works were
able to soak up the transportation costs of importing half their iron ore (at a time when per-
unit freight rates were far higher than they are today) and still remain Europe’s most efficient
producers.
 
It was a game of targeted industrial development in which Germany pushed total
annual investment in its economy to one quarter of GNI, a rate never seen before.
30
Only in the 1880s, after two decades of relying on raw silk as her main foreign currency
earner, was Japan ready to emulate Germany by building factories on a grand scale.
 
She began,
as has every significant developing economy, with textiles, a business with limited capital
requirements and ubiquitous markets.
 
In 1882, the legend
ary Meiji entrepreneur Shibusawa
Eiichi put a technician he had sent to Manchester to study cotton spinning together with a
consortium of financiers and opened a steam-powered mill with 10,500 spindles.
 
The capital
outlay was more than six times any investment in the Japanese cotton industry to date.
 
A year
after it commenced production, the factory paid out to its shareholders an 18 per cent
dividend.
 
Economies of scale had arrived in Japan and the country began to reduce its reliance
on imported cotton thread and cloth, which had accounted for one-third of all imports in the
late 1870s.
31
Shibusawa next convinced government to lift import duties on raw cotton and moved Japan
73
--- Page 74 ---
on to the German-style approach of scale processing of imported raw materials.
 
He saw that
scale producers ideally seek protection at home but also free access to the cheapest, highest-
quality raw materials on the world market.
 
The government sacrificed the interests of
previously protected Japanese cotton farmers to those of industry, and by 1914 various textiles
accounted for 60 per cent of all Japanese exports.
 
The country’s chronic trade deficits ended.
The First World War then disrupted European industrial output, allowing Japanese firms to
move in on colonial Asian markets for all kinds of basic goods: textiles, bicycles, canned foods,
and so on.
 
There was an unprecedented export boom.
 
(In European style, Japan also took
Taiwan, in 1895, and Korea, in 1910, as captive colony markets for itself.)
More export discipline needed
Despite Japanese success, however, there was a latent problem with the development model,
and one that Germany had also experienced.
 
This was that Japan’s biggest companies managed
to avoid doing much exporting, leaving it up to smaller firms.
 
The so-called
 
zaibatsu
 
family
conglomerates which came to dominate the Japanese economy in the inter-war years focused
on mining, shipping and infrastructure concessions and on upstream, domestic-oriented
manufacturing businesses, all of which allowed them to charge high prices to the rest of the
economy without having to bother with the export market.
 
The
 
zaibatsu
 
became huge – by
1928 the Big Four (Mitsui, Mitsubishi, S
umitomo, Yasuda) accounted for about 15 per cent
of all the paid-up capital in the Japanese economy
32
 
– but they frequently profited by putting
the squeeze on downstream manufacturers.
 
This meant that in the good times the
manufacturers survived on thin margins and lacked the cash flows to move on to more
complex activities; and when the bad times hit, they went bust.
With the onset of domestic recession in Japan in 1920, thousands of manufacturers started
to go out of business.
 
As the recession endured, government was eventually driven to discover
the final, essential modification to its industrialisation policy: a subsidy system that forced big
business to behave in the interests of national development, and to export.
 
The process of
discovery was a very gradual one that spanned the Second World War.
 
It was also a process
that Germany had gone through when that country descended the same stretch of the
economic river in the late nineteenth century.
Germany had hit its problems in the two-decade deflationary downturn that occurred in
Europe after a financial crisis in 1873.
 
The German economy was affected much like the
Japanese one in the 1920s, with thousands of smaller, downstream manufacturers driven to
bankruptcy.
 
Firms which survived often did so by creating production cartels which sought to
prevent price cutting.
 
However these cartels – and the mergers they encouraged as big firms
bought up small ones to capture production quotas that were set by cartel boards – only
exacerbated a long-run trend for the biggest, most upstream players in the economy to bilk
both downstream manufacturers and individual consumers.
The situation came to a head when a government inquiry into cartels was held in 1903,
covering some 400 groupings and 12,000 factories.
 
The inquiry roundly criticised raw
material producers for exploiting domestic manufacturers.
 
However, it recognised the need to
sell excess manufacturing output in overseas markets to keep production capacity in use and
Germans in jobs.
 
The solution suggested by the cartel groups was a rebate system that gave raw
material and component cost reductions only to production that was destined, directly or
indirectly, for export.
 
In effect this meant that German domestic prices – kept artificially high
74
--- Page 75 ---
by tariffs – subsidised the development of manufacturing export markets.
 
It marked the birth
of a series of cartel-managed
 
export subsidy regimes that triggered what the economic
historian Clive Trebilcock called ‘the exuberant German export drive of the 1900s’.
33
The first such cartel was put into force by the Steel Works Association in 1904.
34
 
Export
subsidies focused economic activity on capital-intensive manufacturing and helped propel
Germany to the highest rank of contemporary technological development.
 
Weaker members
of export cartels were forced to get rid of obsolete production machinery because the
international market was less forgiving of lower-quality production than the protected
domestic one.
 
This was export discipline at work.
 
German exporters scaled up further and
further to a point where they could fund radical technological innovations.
 
They opened up
and dominated entire new industries like electrical engineering, chemicals and petrochemicals
with vast investments in research and development.
35
Japan refined its industrial policy around the export discipline of large manufacturers over a
long period between 1925 and 1954.
 
The process spanned the Depression and the fascist, war
and early post-war eras.
36
 
It began in 1925, when the Japanese government created the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MCI) with legal authority to oversee the pricing and
quality of important exports.
37
 
Following a devastating banking crisis in 1927, the
Commerce and Industry Deliberation Council was set up to lead mergers of industrial firms
that were facing bankruptcy.
 
The term
 
sangyō gōrika
 
–
 
​
‘ i ndustrial rational isation’ – came  i nto
use to signify the need for the state to cull weaker industrial firms within the context of a
protectionist environment that nurtured industrial development.
38
 
In 1930 a senior MCI
official, Kishi Nobosuke, spent seven months in Germany studying how cartels operated
there.
 
In 1931, after Kishi published his report, a new law allowed for a cartel in any business
where two-thirds of entrants wanted one; it also provided the government with clear powers
to enforce cartel agreements.
39
 
By the mid 1930s cartels existed in twenty-six industries, from
iron and steel to silk thread.
 
However, as in Germany before the introduction of export
subsidies, these measures only tended to strengthen the great
 
zaibatsu
 
whose activities were
concentrated in upstream businesses, while downstream manufacturers remained under the
zaibatsu
 
kosh (albeit in an expanding economy in the 1930s as militarisation pumped up
economic growth).
40
 
Before the Second World War, the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry remained focused on protecting manufacturers from the
 
predations of the
 
zaibatsu
,
rather than imposing export discipline on the whole industrial structure.
The final pieces of Japan’s manufacturing policy puzzle had to wait until the arrival of the
Supreme Commander
 
for
 
the Allied Powers (SCAP), Douglas MacArthur, after the Second
World War.
 
It was the American-led government which dispossessed the
 
zaibatsu
 
families
(they had been too close to the military), banned their holding companies and instead
enhanced the powers of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
 
MITI was born out of the
MCI in 1949.
 
It obtained extraordinary controls over both industrial policy and trade policy
– powers intended only as temporary post-war measures by the SCAP – which allowed it to
combine export discipline with culling losers to a degree never before seen.
41
 
After Japan’s
independence was restored in 1952, and a somewhat timorous pro-American government led
75
--- Page 76 ---
by Yoshida Shigeru fell in 1954, MITI went to work.
The rest, as they say, is history.
 
MITI ran a protectionist pro-manufacturing policy built
around rigorous export discipline.
 
The big industrial firms of post-war Japan were beholden
not to
 
zaibatsu
 
bosses, but to MITI bureaucrats who focused them on exports by exempting
up to 80 per cent of their export revenues from taxation.
 
When Japan was forced under the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to stop tax exemption of export earnings
in 1964, MITI instead based firms’ depreciation allowances on export performance – an
equivalent tax rebate by a back door.
 
In the 1950s MITI officials, still working far inside the
global technological frontier, systematically researched and built the foundations of a world-
class manufacturing economy.
 
They moved year by year through steel, shipping, fertilisers,
synthetic textiles, plastics, petrochemicals, automobiles and electronics.
 
MITI’s Enterprises
Bureau licensed the acquisition of all foreign technology, involving 2,487 contracts between
1950 and
 
1963.
 
An Industrial Structure Council – an enhanced version of the 1927
Commerce and Industry Deliberation Council – was set up with forty-five committees to
oversee every major industry.
 
The bureaucrats who ran the committees hammered out
agreements with business leaders on export targets, quality control standards, productivity,
capacity changes and mergers.
42
 
Firms that did not co-operate with MITI found that they
had no foreign exchange allocation to buy raw materials and e
quipment.
 
Favoured
manufacturers were given not only subsidies and tax breaks but also publicly funded
infrastructure investment and free land.
43
 
Most business leaders loathed being told what to
do, but they had little choice but to co-operate.
All this represented the raising to a new level of the infant industry policies that had spread
from Britain to the independent United States to Prussia and the rest of continental Europe
in the nineteenth century.
 
Of course, impressive and effective refinements of state-led
industrial policy were seen in West Germany, France and Italy after the Second World War.
However, it was the aggressive application of infant industry techniques in a relatively poorer
country, Japan, that caught the world’s attention most forcefully.
 
From 1952 Japanese
manufacturing and mining output increased more than tenfold in only two decades.
 
Japan
became the first state to close in on sustained double-digit economic growth.
44
 
Many people
thought the country had discovered a new and unbeatable form of economic management.
(The US and Japanese bestseller
 
Japan as Number One
 
came out in 1979.) In fact Japan had
merely rediscovered old ideas, and built on earlier German refinements thereof.
 
Moreover,
while the Japanese capacity to burnish and improve those ideas was impressive, it was put in
the shade by South Korea and Taiwan.
 
Meiji Japan was a relatively powerful, stable state –
soon to be a colonial power – when it began implementing its industrialisation programme in
the nineteenth century.
 
Its two former colonies were small, repressed and, particularly in
South Korea’s case, dirt poor when they started out on their journeys in the early 1950s.
Historian and general
The means by which effective manufacturing policy came to South Korea was simple.
 
The
man who defined Korea’s modernisation era was General Park Chung Hee, who came to
power in a coup on 16 May 1961.
 
Park had served as a lieutenant in the Japanese colonial
military, in the elite Kwangtung army when it oversaw a huge industrialisation drive in Korea
and Chinese Manchuria in the 1930s.
 
Unlike European colonists, Japan belatedly built
76
--- Page 77 ---
manufacturing plants in its colonies and the result was an industrialisation example that post-
colonial leaderships could follow.
45
 
(In European and American colonies, there were no
medium- or heavy- industrial plants because all but the most basic industrial goods were
supplied from the home country.)
General Park therefore had Japanese ideas about how to run his country.
 
However, he was
also an amateur historian who specialised in the histories of rising powers.
 
He was well read on
German development, and followed closely that country’s swift, state-led re-industrialisation
after the Second World War.
 
He also knew in detail the stories of Sun Yat-sen, Turkey’s
Kemal Pasha and Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser and their efforts to nurture modern, large-scale
industries.
 
Nine months after taking power in Korea, the peasant-born Park published a book
of his own,
 
Our Nation’s Path: Ideology for Social Reconstruction
, which contained a road map
for what Park described as ‘co-ordination and supervisory guidance, by the state, of mammoth
economic strength’.
46
 
The next year Park published
 
The Country, the Revolution and I
, with
chapters on ‘The Miracle on the Rhine’ and ‘Various Forms of Revolution’ in which he
discussed different historical revolutions from an economic and developmental perspective.
(He always referred to his own coup as a revolution.) In both his books, in a reference to the
river that runs through Seoul, Park promised his countrymen a ‘miracle on the Han’.
Because Park had been a member of a communist cell in the South Korean army in the
1940s, South Korea’s American allies were nervous that he might still be a closet communist.
But he stressed that, as in Japan, the Korean state would do the planning while the private
sector would lead the investment: ‘The economic planning or long-range development
programme must not be allowed to stifle creativity or spontaneity of private enterprise,’ Park
wrote.
 
‘We should utilise to the maximum extent the merits usually introduced by the price
machinery of free competition, thus avoiding the possible damages accompanying a monopoly
system.
 
There can be and will be no economic planning for the sake of planning itself.’
 
He
gave as his historical cue the co-opting of private capitalism by the Meiji oligarchs:
‘Millionaires … were allowed to enter the central stage, both politically and economically, thus
encouraging national capitalism,’ he wrote.
 
‘The case of the Meiji imperial restoration will be
of great help to the performance of our own
 
revolution.’
47
Park knew his history and his books also show that he had a fine grasp of the basic economic
condition and resources of his country.
 
He was a very well informed peasant.
 
Like the Meiji
oligarchs in Japan in the 1930s, however, Park had not yet worked out the role of export
subsidies.
 
But he quickly discovered the power of these when, desperate for foreign exchange,
his regime created a textile cartel on the Japanese model, furnishing it with cheap loans, tax
exemptions and tariff exemptions on its raw materials.
48
 
Overseas sales increased and
precious foreign exchange started to flow in.
 
In 1962 Korea’s merchandise exports were worth
USD56 million; three years later they were worth over USD170 million.
49
 
Park was so happy
that he declared that from 1964 every 30 November would be Korea National Export Day.
He needed the hard currency to import equipment for the massive industrial investments he
planned.
 
‘Thereafter,’ the scholar Alice Amsden noted, ‘the Park regime increasingly made
exports a compulsion rather than a choice.’
50
 
Indeed, Korea became the most export-
dependent developmental state the world had seen, with the government giving subsidised
77
--- Page 78 ---
credit to any firm that sold abroad.
 
The interest rate paid by exporters ranged between a
quarter and a half of the rate paid by everybody else.
 
In the high-inflation 1970s, the real,
inflation-adjusted interest rate given to exporters was between –10 per cent and –20 per cent
per annum.
 
So long as they could raise their sale prices in line with inflation, exporters were
being paid to borrow money.
51
With merchandise exports rising around twentyfold in the 1960s to USD836 million in
1970,
 
Park doled out production licences and credit lines to entrepreneurs whose exports
impressed, giving them the opportunity to pursue his vast infrastructural and industrial
developments.
 
Many people have likened the
 
chaebol
 
business groups that were thus nurtured
– the biggest like Hyundai, Daewoo and Samsung each absorbed one-tenth of bank credit in
peak years – to Japan’s pre-war
 
zaibatsu
.
 
However, whereas the old
 
zaibatsu
 
were adept at
avoiding export obligations, Park’s
 
chaebol
 
were compelled to lead the export campaign.
 
Korea
thereby avoided the problem of export-shy big business that had for a long time constrained
both Japan and Germany.
 
The country went straight to a more effective form of infant
industry promotion.
Of course, it was not all Park’s doing.
 
He was ably assisted by other Koreans who had also
observed Japan’s pre-war industrialisation.
 
Among these was an important group that had
worked for the colonial Industrial Bank of Chosen,
52
 
led by Chang Ki-Yong, who headed the
Economic Planning Board.
 
Park gave the EPB powers which, like those of MITI in Japan,
straddled both trade and industry; its director’s political rank was that of vice prime minister.
In the 1970s the EPB set out a massive heavy and chemical industries (HCI) investment
programme.
 
Juicy subsidies, including cheap credit and land, were offered to entrepreneurs
who were prepared to build export-capable plants for petrochemicals, machine building, steel,
shipbuilding, electronics and non-ferrous metals.
 
Most professional economists said the HCI
plan was lunacy.
 
Even record-setting Japan had three-quarters of a century of industrial
experience behind it when it undertook its heavy industrial drive in the 1950s.
 
The World
Bank’s 1974 report on South Korea expressed ‘grave reservations about the practicability of
many of the export goals set for individual heavy industries’ and recommended the country
stick with textiles.
53
 
The warning looked prescient at the start of the 1980s when Korea was
saddled with extreme overcapacity in heavy industry.
 
Yet, even at the nadir, the firms that
Park backed were slowly breaking into export markets and in the mid-1980s boom in US and
European markets, Korea emerged as a global force in steel and shipbuilding, and later in
semiconductors and autos.
 
By 1987 the World Bank was writing that the vast, integrated
Korean steel plant, Pohang Iron and Steel (now known as POSCO), was ‘arguably the world’s
most efficient producer’;
54
 
the Bank had refused to finance the plant.
 
As of 1984, three-fifths
of Korean exports came from the heavy and chemical industries Park had demanded, versus
less than one-quarter at the start of the HCI drive in 1973.
Along the way, Korean bureaucrats were reading not the rising American stars of neo-liberal
economics, or even Adam Smith, but instead Friedrich List.
 
The Korea and Taiwan scholar
Robert Wade observed when he was teaching in Korea in the late 1970s that ‘whole shelves’ of
List’s books could be found in the university bookshops of Seoul.
 
When he moved to the
Massachussetts Insitute of Technology, Wade found that a solitary copy of List’s main work
78
--- Page 79 ---
had last been taken out of the library in 1966.
55
 
Such are the different economics appropriate
to
 
different stages of development.
 
In Korea, List’s ideas for a national system of development
were being adapted to a country with a population far smaller than Germany’s or Japan’s, and
with a mid-1970s GDP per capita on par with Guatemala.
56
 
The ideas were implemented in
the teeth of the worst international trading conditions for a generation featuring two
unprecedented energy crises.
 
It did not matter.
 
Park motored on regardless.
 
Each time the US,
the World Bank and the IMF urged him to back away from his state-led industrial policy he
agreed – and then did precisely nothing (or occasionally a very little).
57
 
Park was a leader of
conviction, and his convictions were based in history.
Public sector variants
China and Taiwan’s approaches to industrialisation differed from Japan and Korea’s because
of the different roles played in these economies by public ownership.
 
On the mainland after
1949, the Communist Party of China (CPC) nationalised everything.
 
In Taiwan, where the
defeated Kuomintang (KMT) party set itself up, a big role was also given to state ownership.
The reason was the common legacy of republican China from 1911 to 1949.
 
Sun Yat-sen’s
abiding antipathy to private ownership, the influence of Russia on the republican government
until 1927 (when Chiang Kai-shek split with Russian and Chinese communists) and the
subsequent influence of Germany and then German national socialism in the 1930s meant
that, before 1949, public ownership of industry in China was already the norm.
58
The vehicle for state ownership in China before 1949 was an industrial planning
bureaucracy that was far bigger, and more sophisticated, than
 
almost anyone, including
Chinese people
,
 
realise
s
.
 
From 1935, following earlier, smaller-scale experiments with
planning, industrial policy was directed by the now-forgotten National Resources
Commission (NRC).
 
Under Kuomintang leadership, the NRC became a huge planning
agency in the 1930s, responsible for strategic civilian and defence industries.
 
In 1936, it
implemented an ambitious barter deal with Nazi Germany that traded Chinese minerals for
German industrial technology; the arrangement only ended because of Hitler’s decision to
side with Japan after Japan launched an all-out war against China in 1937.
59
 
Under military
mobilisation against the Japanese, the NRC
 
continued to grow and to expand its control over
industry.
 
By 1944 it had 12,000 staff and 160,000 dependent workers in mining,
manufacturing and electricity generating enterprises.
 
Some businesses were set up as state
firms and others were nationalised from the private sector.
 
As of the Second World War,
almost seven-tenths of the paid-up capital of registered businesses in China belonged to state
firms, most of them managed by the NRC.
60
During the Second World War, the agency produced an enormously detailed, 20-volume
plan for the industrialisation of China once the conflict ended.
 
But with the resumption of
the Chinese civil war in 1946, and much less US aid than Chiang Kai-shek had hoped for, the
NRC’s grand ambitions were not realised.
 
The agency continued to expand, to a record head
count of 33,000 staff and nearly a quarter of a million workers in its enterprises by late 1947,
but it was unable to put most of its developmental plans into action.
 
NRC bureaucrats in
republican China had a reputation for relative competence and professionalism.
 
Most of them
stayed in communist China after 1949 and helped to hand over control of already state-run
79
--- Page 80 ---
companies to the CPC; many went on to work in Mao’s state planning apparatus.
 
The State
Planning Commission (SPC) was created in 1953 and implemented numerous projects that
had been conceived by the NRC – although personnel who had been employed under the
Kuomintang later suffered persecution in political campaigns.
 
The SPC is today called the
National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC).
A much smaller number of NRC staffers, most of whom had been posted to the NRC’s
Taiwan regional office when Japan gave up the island in 1945, went on to work there.
 
They
were allowed far greater influence than their peers on the mainland, and supplied a generation
of Taiwanese economic leadership – including eight of the fourteen ministers of economic
affairs prior to 1985, under whom the critical Industrial Development Bureau operated.
61
These were the senior officials who enacted a manufacturing policy that gave heavy preference
to public companies.
 
They created a Taiwanese state sector concentrated in the same
businesses that had been targeted by the NRC – petrochemicals, steel, shipbuilding, heavy
machinery and other types of engineering – and then they expanded the coverage.
 
Former
NRC employees also ran many of the state firms.
 
By the early 1980s, India and Burma were
the only countries
 
in contemporary non-communist Asia that had public sectors of
comparable scale.
62
Unlike Maoist China (or India or Burma), however, state ownership in Taiwan had limited
impact on growth and technological upgrading because government stressed the role of
exports in development.
 
It targeted specific sectors for export promotion from the early 1950s
(starting with processed foodstuffs
 
and then textiles
), allowed exporters to retain a share of the
foreign exchange they earned (all other foreign exchange had to be handed over to the central
bank), offered direct cash subsidies to exporters for a period, organised export cartels in order
to ‘manage’ competition, and introduced a limited amount of concessionary export credit
which, from 1957 to the mid 1970s, provided short-term export loans at rates around 50 per
cent cheaper than non-exporters paid.
63
 
In the 1970s, Taiwan pushed further into heavy
industry, into synthetic textiles and into the electronics sector for which it is today best
known.
 
The government set up the Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI) in 1973,
and the Electronic Research and Service Organisation (ERSO) in 1974, in order to license
foreign technology, undertake publicly funded research and development, and select public
and private firms to utilise the research and make new products.
 
Where Korea targeted mass-
production memory chips, Taiwan went after application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs),
which are developed with specific consumer electronic products in mind.
 
By the mid 1980s
ITRI and ERSO combined had well over 5,000 staff, as well as huge state-controlled
production subsidiaries.
64
That lurking problem
Export discipline in Taiwan was ostensibly highly effective.
 
In 1952, the value of Taiwan’s
exports was equivalent to only 9 per cent of GDP; by 1979, the figure was 50 per cent.
Through the 1970s exports grew so fast that one study found they accounted for almost 70
per cent of overall manufacturing expansion.
65
 
However, on close inspection Taiwan grew up
with an export economy that had some similar structural weaknesses to those of nineteenth-
century Germany and pre-Second World War Japan.
 
In 1985, it was small and medium-sized
80
--- Page 81 ---
enterprises with fewer than 300 employees which accounted for 65 per cent of exports, the
same ratio as in Japan in the 1920s.
 
Whereas the situ
ations in Germany and Japan were the
results of a failure to make big private firms export, in Taiwan there was a failure to impose
rigorous export discipline on big state firms.
 
It was a new twist to an old problem.
66
 
At the
same time, Taiwan also failed to support its exporting private entrepreneurs as effectively as
post-Second World War Japan and Korea.
For several decades, nobody paid much attention to Taiwan’s export structure.
 
The island
consistently boasted a higher GDP per capita than South Korea – USD8,000 in 1990 versus
USD6,300 for Korea.
 
Part of the differential is explained by the fact that Taiwan got moving
faster with its development in the 1950s, when Korean policy under Syngman Rhee was much
less focused.
 
It was also the case that Taiwan’s land reform was the most effective the world
has seen, and provided a strong boost to early manufacturing growth.
 
However, Taiwan’s
manufacturing policy was very much second best to Korea’s, and failed to impose adequate
export discipline on its biggest businesses.
 
This policy lapse eventually caught up with the
island’s economy.
 
In the 1990s, Korea closed its GDP per capita gap with Taiwan before being
temporarily knocked back by the Asian financial crisis.
 
Then it quickly caught up again, and
today boasts a USD2,000 GDP per capita lead over Taiwan.
67
Being state-owned was not the only reason why big Taiwanese state firms failed to become as
globally competitive as Korean
 
chaebol
.
 
(Public ownership is often associated with poor
performance, but it does not guarantee it.) Taiwanese state enterprises underperformed
Korean corporations because they faced less export discipline and less competition.
 
They were
allowed to be more dependent on foreign equity joint ventures for technology, and this
weakened their capacity to originate their own technology.
 
An example of the phenomenon is
the telecommunications sector, where local firms were unable to break their dependency on
US multinational partners ITT and GTE.
68
 
Meanwhile, Taiwan’s leading private companies,
like the computer manufacturer Acer, were denied the level of export subsidy, domestic
protection and financial support given to their Korean cousins, and so were forced to live off
thinner margins, consequently becoming less technologically competitive and smaller in
scale.
69
 
By the start of the 1980s, Korea already had ten firms in the
 
Fortune 500 list of
leading industrial companies; Taiwan had two.
70
 
Compared with Korean firms, Taiwan’s
exporters do more low-margin manufacturing as suppliers to American and European
multinationals – making, for instance, all of the world’s iPhones and iPads – and less higher-
margin manufacturing under their own brands, whereas Korea has Samsung selling its own
smart phones and leading the world by sales, and Hyundai among the top five global auto
makers.
71
 
Taiwan may be structurally ‘stuck’ one level below the branded, high-margin top
layer of economic activity where the richest countries exist.
The triumph of the historians
Despite the relative failings of industrial policy in Taiwan, it remains the case that Japan,
Korea and Taiwan are all examples of states that have successfully managed to develop their
manufacturing businesses.
 
Each of their governments exercised the minimum necessary level
of export discipline.
 
Korea and Taiwan went from being the world’s 33rd and 28th leading
exporters in 1965 to being the 13th and 10th respectively twenty years later.
 
At that point,
81
--- Page 82 ---
both economies boasted greater manufacturing exports than the whole of Latin America.
72
The heavy industrialisation drives pursued by Korea and Taiwan took the ratio of their light
to heavy manufacturing from 4:1 to 1:1 in only fifteen years.
Of course, manufacturing policy throughout north-east Asia was based on the solid
foundation of highly productive, expanding agricultural sectors.
 
Meiji Japan had developed
faster than early nineteenth-century Prussia or eighteenth-century Britain in large part
because its agricultural output had also increased faster, creating a domestic market for basic
manufactures which firms later exported.
 
In the 1950s, Japanese farm output increased by
another half in one decade, and once more a booming rural market demanded manufacturing
products which went on to become export staples.
73
 
Chalmers Johnson reckoned that in the
1950s and 1960s transistor radios and cameras were the only two important Japanese export
goods which had not first been honed in the domestic market.
74
 
In the same vein Korea and,
especially, Taiwan were able to build out manufacturing economies from their agricultural
sectors.
 
Each north-east Asian state bore out the truism set down by the Japanologists Kazushi
Ohkawa and Henry Rosovsky
 
when analysing the original Meiji lift-off: ‘If there had been no
increase in the output of the traditional economy, there could hardly have existed any
domestic market for the output of modern industry.’
75
At the industrial policy-making level, what stands out with the benefit of hindsight is that
there was almost no role played in Japan, Korea or Taiwan by economists.
 
Meiji Japan blazed
its trail by following the Prussian, and earlier American, model which rejected the modern
classical economics that began with Adam Smith and David Ricardo.
 
The framers of the Meiji
revolution were trained in Germany and at Tokyo University’s law school, which focused not
so much on law as on European-style public administration.
76
 
There was a strong prejudice
against the theoretical approach associated with modern economics, and in favour of practical
problem-solving.
 
Yoshino Shinji, vice minister of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in
the 1930s, said of Japan’s implementation of German industrial planning techniques that:
‘Concerning the idea of control, there are many complex explanations of it in terms of logical
principles, but all one really needs to understand it is common sense.’
77
 
Japan exalted the
educated generalist – its government bureaucracy distinguished between administrative
officers and technical officers, and the former always outranked the latter.
 
At the height of its
powers in the 1960s, MITI had just two employees with PhDs in economics among its senior
staff.
78
A similar disposition carried over into South Korea, where until at least the 1970s almost all
the senior leaders and bureaucrats,
 
including Park Chung Hee and planning chief Chang Ki-
yong, were Japanese trained.
 
The main difference was one of class: many senior personnel in
the 1960s and 1970s came, like Park himself, from peasant stock.
 
The Korea scholar Jung-en
Woo referred to them as ‘men of peasant origin … when they thought of capitalism, they
thought of a conspiracy of the rich’.
 
In Taiwan, the constructors of industrial policy were not
generalist administrators as in Japan, but engineers.
 
Almost all Taiwan’s ministers of
economic affairs, most of whom started out in the mainland’s National Resources
Commission, had engineering or other science degrees.
 
K.
 
Y.
 
Yin, who defined industrial
policy more than anyone and started out at the Industrial Development Bureau in the 1950s,
82
--- Page 83 ---
was an electrical e
ngineer.
 
The IDB did not employ any economists until 1981.
79
The most prominent economists in circulation in north-east Asia in the 1950s and 1960s
were the ones sent by the US government to try to ‘straighten out’ its new allies.
 
Among these
was Joseph Dodge, who was despatched to occupied Japan in 1949 to enforce fiscal
austerity.
80
 
His policies induced a deep, deflationary recession in the winter of 1949–50.
 
The
country only recovered with the onset of the Korean War from June 1950 and the
concomitant demand for war-related supplies.
 
In 1952, Japan regained its sovereignty and
MITI then followed its own, history-oriented instincts.
 
In South Korea in the 1950s and early
1960s, US-despatched economists demanded the privatisation of banks, increases in interest
rates and import liberalisation.
 
The banks were briefly privatised, but Park Chung Hee
renationalised them after his coup.
 
Under pressure, he gave some ground on interest rates and
import controls, but most changes were cosmetic and designed to get the Americans off his
back.
 
As exports picked up from the mid 1960s, Park’s regime became increasingly confident
in resisting the demands of free market economists.
81
It would be wrong, however, to think that only economists of a neo-classical stripe were
providing advice from Washington.
 
After the Second World War a historical view of
development was still contending with a rising neo-liberal one in the economics profession.
Just as Wolf Ladejinsky enjoyed a few post-war years of great influence over agricultural
policy, so a handful of historically literate advisers were being taken seriously in the US capital
on matters of industrial development.
 
The most important of these was Walt Rostow.
 
Like
Ladejinsky, Rostow was from an immigrant Russian family.
 
Unlike Ladejinsky, he wore his
anti-communist sentiments on his sleeve, meaning he prospered through the Cold War,
becoming a senior adviser to three successive presidents
:
 
Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson.
As an economic historian, Rostow brought a classic Listian perspective to Washington.
 
His
key work,
 
The Stages of Economic Growth
, is about how developing states all descend, as the
Japanese phrase has it, the same stretch of the economic river; Taiwan’s chief planner, K.
 
Y.
Yin, was among the book’s fans.
82
The US appetite for land reform in east Asia disappeared in the early 1950s with the
sidelining of Ladejinsky.
 
But Rostow and his supporters continued to press US governments
to accommodate the industrialisation of friendly states like Korea and Taiwan, and infant
industry manufacturing programmes were grudgingly tolerated.
 
Indeed, the US often paid for
such policies with its vast military and civilian aid budgets.
 
Non-repayable grants were cut
back in the late 1950s, but other money continued to flow through the US Development
Loan Fund, whose explicit Rostovian aim was to support the industrialisation of Cold War
allies.
 
The governments in Seoul and Taipei not only structured infant industry programmes
on the US buck, they made American consultants fit in with their objectives.
 
In Taiwan, for
example, the New York engineering firm J.
 
G.
 
White was used to screen scores of state sector
heavy industrial projects.
 
And US consultancy Arthur D.
 
Little was tasked with identifying
new manufacturing products to promote, while advising on tax breaks to subsidise exporters
(the latter a policy that would today be illegal under World Trade Organisation rules).
83
North-east Asian states, unlike south-east Asian ones, used money proferred by the US to
strengthen industrial policy.
 
At the same time, neo-classical economists in north-east Asia
83
--- Page 84 ---
were, as Robert Wade put it, ‘held at a distance so that their preoccupation with efficiency
criteria would not subvert the process of identifying industries and products for intensified
growth’.
84
 
When such economists did start to appear in positions of influence in Korea and
Taiwan in the 1980s, ‘efficiency’ issues were becoming more pressing – large firms brought
into being by the state were increasingly abusive of their oligopoly positions, and consumers
were growing
 
w
eary
 
of being on the wrong end of state industrial policy, with its high
domestic prices subsidising export competitiveness.
 
In Korea, economists ‘with their newly
minted US PhDs’, as Jung-En Woo disparagingly put it, wrought havoc with the financial
system in the 1980s, setting the stage for Korea’s 1998 financial meltdown.
85
 
However, their
entry on to the policy stage was becoming necessary at a time when Korea was
 
already
 
globally
competitive in a number of manufacturing sectors, and needed to deregulate to progress
further.
In south-east Asia, by contrast, the historian’s understanding of the development process
never got a look-in.
 
Newly independent countries fiddled around with industrial p
olicy, and
then moved precipitously to taking advice from efficiency-oriented economists.
 
Sometimes
these were local economists trained abroad – as with the so-called ‘Berkeley Mafia’ of five
leading advisers to Suharto in Indonesia, who had all studied at the University of
California.
86
 
More often, the economic advice came from the World Bank and the IMF,
which were ready with their free market prescriptions for development, despite the fact that
these prescriptions have never produced a successful industrial state.
 
In recent years it has
become fashionable to heap much of the blame for the developing world’s ills on the World
Bank and the IMF.
 
However, it is more constructive to digest the principal lesson of Meiji
Japan: that, hard as it may be, a developing state does not have to depend on the advice of
others.
 
It can take control of its own destiny, look out at the world with open eyes, and figure
out what really goes on.
 
As the fifth and final article of the Meiji Charter Oath, promulgated
at the new emperor’s enthronement in April 1868, read: ‘Knowledge shall be sought
throughout the world so as to strengthen the foundation of imperial rule.’
87
Off to Korea and Malaysia
In order to understand how industrial policy works close up, it is necessary to see how
different manufacturing sectors were managed in north-east Asian versus south-east Asian
countries.
 
One of the most interesting country comparisons is between Korea and Malaysia,
because under Mahathir Mohamad the latter made a unique political commitment within
south-east Asia to industrialisation based on north-east Asian experience.
 
Yet the outcome
was far from what was hoped for.
 
The reasons illuminate some of the most important lessons
about industrial policy.
 
Korea and Malaysia set out with not dissimilar domestic business
structures.
 
But they ended up completely different.
 
In Korea, effective policy changed the very
nature of the economy; in Malaysia, key features of its old colonial economy remained intact.
Korea’s industrial development experience is particularly instructive in north-east Asia
because it is fresher than Japan’s and, in terms of the export discipline applied to big firms,
purer
 
than Taiwan’s.
 
Whereas Japan after the Second World War built on its earlier
developmental gains, Korea rose through a far rawer developmental experience.
 
The country
started out after independence from Japan in 1945 with a tiny entrepreneurial class of
compradores who had acted as commercial go-betweens for the colonial power.
 
In the 1950s,
84
--- Page 85 ---
these men were allowed to buy state assets cheaply, and to acquire many monopoly
concessions, from Syngman Rhee’s government.
 
There was no concomitant pressure to
manufacture for export, and Korea remained dependent on American aid.
 
But after Park
Chung Hee’s 1961 coup, the new regime began to apply export discipline with a vengeance,
and to cull underperforming firms.
 
In place of a hotch-potch of domestic economy-oriented
businesses, Korea went on to produce a group of huge, manufacturing-based conglomerates
with brand names – typified by Hyundai and Samsung – that are known around the world.
Both types of company – pre- and post-Park – were family-run, but state industrial policy
completely changed how these firms behaved.
After Malaysia gained its independence from Britain in 1957, its economy exhibited
important structural similarities to that of Syngman Rhee’s Korea.
88
 
The old colonial
compradore class which operated between the British and the Malay sultans continued to
dominate private business, enjoyed an enlarged share of state concessions for new investments
like food processing plants, and faced minimal pressure to manufacture or export.
 
In the
1970s, the government used state entities to buy out various mining and plantation interests
still owned by British companies.
 
But there was no shift to an export manufacturing strategy
for domestic firms.
 
Instead, government invited foreign companies to set up export processing
operations in Malaysia.
 
Then, with the ascent to the premiership of Mahathir Mohamad in
1981, came a belated recognition that Malaysia had gone through twenty years of
independence without starting to build an industrial structure worthy of the name.
Mahathir announced a ‘Look East’ policy in which he said Malaysia would emulate the
manufacturing development programmes of north-east Asia.
 
He had taken a keen interest in
Japan and Korea as Minister for Trade and Industry, immediately before he became prime
minister.
 
It seemed for a moment that, just as Korea had learned from Japan which had
learned from Germany, so
 
Malaysia was going to learn the lessons of history, too.
 
Yet despite
sending thousands of Malaysians to Japan for training, and even taking his cabinet on a course
to learn Japanese tea-drinking etiquette, Mahathir failed to understand the most basic
prerequisites of infant industry policy: export discipline and sanctions for failure.
 
He tried to
make state-owned firms do more than they were capable of, and completely failed to discipline
Malaysia’s leading entrepreneurs, who socked away billions of dollars without making any
serious developmental contribution.
 
Mahathir’s 1980s adventure became a tragi-comedy in
which he told cabinet colleagues to read a wholly inappropriate book on economic
development, and substituted overwrought cultural theories for simple, structural
explanations of economic cause and effect.
 
Despite this, even Mahathir’s half-baked industrial
policy left Malaysia better off than a country like the Philippines, which did nothing effective
to enhance its manufacturing capacity.
 
Malaysia is a manufacturing failure, but it is a reminder
that it is better to fail trying than never to try at all.
Among the different industrial sectors that provide useful comparisons between developing
states, the most fundamental one is steel making.
 
Steel has been an important part of the early
industrialisation process of all rich states bar financial havens and low-population agricultural
specialists.
 
Steel was critical to the economic development of Britain, the United States,
Germany and other continental European states, as well as to each of the three north-east
Asian success stories.
 
It continues to be an essential input into all manufacturing economies.
The capability to make steel efficiently has, historically, signalled that a country will go on to
85
--- Page 86 ---
make other things efficiently – a sort of entry-level test for the economic big time.
 
Park Chung
Hee seemed to know this when he inscribed the Chinese characters
 
gangtie guo li
 
– ‘Iron and
Steel is National Strength’ – that hang on the wall at the headquarters of Pohang Iron and
Steel, Korea’s first big steel plant.
Success in steel making depends on scale, on organising a limited number of inputs, and on
constant incremental improvements to a core technology that has been the same for a very
long time.
 
This bureaucratic, organisational challenge means steel making can be tackled
under state ownership.
 
In Japan, Korea and Taiwan, governments initially owned steel plants,
in addition to deciding at a state policy level what products to make, which technology to buy
and how much
 
capital to commit.
 
The role of the private entrepreneur was usurped, but in
each case steel was produced extremely efficiently.
 
Japan and Korea eventually privatised their
steel makers; Taiwan never has.
 
Malaysia opted for the same combination of state direction of
strategy and public ownership as Taiwan.
 
Yet Malaysia’s efforts to deliver a public sector steel
champion came up very short.
In most businesses, the state is not cut out to replace entirely the private entrepreneur.
Other sectors involve a greater number of inputs and supplier relationships than steel, as well
as a much bigger marketing challenge.
 
Such is the case with car making, which Korea, Malaysia
and every major east Asian economy apart from the Philippines tried to break into.
 
The
marketing requirement in particular favours the talents and energy of the private entrepreneur
because of the need for flexibility and for swift responses to changing market tastes.
 
As a result,
the state’s most effective role is not to take over all aspects of entrepreneurial activity, but
rather to channel the private entrepreneur towards its developmental ends.
 
In particular, the
entrepreneur must be compelled to compete internationally in a business that is a cut-throat
and highly cyclical.
 
In Korea, government achieved this by attracting half a dozen hungry
businessmen with the subsidies, only to whittle them down over thirty years to a single, world-
beating Hyundai–Kia colossus.
 
The process was far from tidy – in fact, it was often chaotic –
but with the anchor of export discipline it was ultimately successful.
 
Malaysia, by contrast,
first tried to enter the car business with a single state-owned firm – so that it was impossible to
threaten to favour another entrant – and with no serious export discipline.
 
Then it added a
second public–private joint venture, focusing on a different segment of the market, again with
no real export discipline.
 
Malaysia’s most successful private entrepreneurs were not tapped for
the effort, and were instead allowed to carry on building their empires in non-manufacturing,
protected activities such as mobile telephony services or power generation.
 
Today Malaysia’s
car industry, like all its large-scale manufacturing industry, is a state sector headache, while its
private entrepreneurs exist in a parallel, non-manufacturing universe.
Korea and Malaysia point up the
 
single most important commonality of all developing states
in terms
 
of manufacturing policy: that in most large-scale businesses the critical
 
v
ariable is the
relationship between the state and private entrepreneurs.
 
A government can try to circumvent
the private sector by
 
running every firm itself.
 
But such an approach is not
 
recommended by
history.
 
Instead, governments must use their power –
 
particularly their discretion over state-
controlled assets, business licences, credit and
 
scarce foreign exchange – to make private
entrepreneurs do what
 
industrial development requires.
 
In so doing, governments need to take
a realistic view of entrepreneurs.
 
Rather than plead with them
 
to move voluntarily to some
higher moral plane, it is
 
better to accept the existence of the entrepreneur’s ‘animal spirits’,
89
86
--- Page 87 ---
and use his desire to make as much money as
 
possible to control him.
 
The entrepreneur seeks
to ‘get in
 
and grab’, as the term indicates.
 
The state has to
 
force him to fulfill developmental
objectives while this is going on.
Development is therefore a thoroughly political undertaking.
 
If governments allow
entrepreneurs access to what economists call ‘rents’ – sources of income at government
discretion – without contributing to developmental objectives, this is a political dereliction of
duty.
 
What south-east Asians were the first to call ‘crony capitalism’, whereby businessmen are
granted concessions without developmental strings attached, is a political failure rather than
an entrepreneurial one.
 
The term originates in the Philippines, where the political class has
been the most selfish and culpable among all the major states in east Asia.
 
Neo-liberal
economists argue that developing countries should avoid the risk of crony capitalism by
getting rid of economic rents.
 
But while this might make sense in rich countries, in aspiring
states it simply begs the question: How, in that case, will you get entrepreneurs to do what you
need them to do in order to develop your economy?
 
Were Park Chung Hee – who nurtured
world-beating entrepreneurs but never trusted them – still alive, his answer would quite
certainly be: You won’t.
 
Rents are the bait with which the successful developing state catches
and controls its entrepreneurs.
Journey 3: Seoul to Pohang and Ulsan
South Korea’s capital Seoul, like South K
orea generally, is a bit of a mess.
 
The city’s hilly setting
gives it a certain topographical charm.
 
But apart from some tidy bits around City Hall, the place
has the hallmarks of a job done cheaply, not that cheerfully and all too quickly.
 
In a very un-
Japanese fashion, people are prone to leave rubbish out on the street.
 
In the suburbs, the
monotonous high-rises look about right for the OECD country with the highest suicide rate.
 
The
food, however, is superb, and the taxis relatively cheaper than in Taiwan and Japan thanks to
Korea’s less than punctilious commitment to north-east Asian social equality.
90
The epicentre of Seoul is the top of a circle of which the bottom half is formed by a U-bend
in the Han river.
 
Here are City Hall, big business and the main public spaces.
 
It is around this
epicentre that three locations in the city quickly explain the nature of the relationship that was
formed in the 1960s between Park Chung Hee and the businessmen who industrialised
Korea.
 
The first location is the presidential residence, a couple of kilometres to the north of
the centre.
 
It was here that, in the wake of the May 1961 coup, Park made the 60-acre Blue
House compound his command post for Korean development; it has remained the centre of
government ever since.
 
Park abandoned the now-demolished, Japanese-built capitol for all but
ceremonial occasions and instead consolidated key offices of his regime in a modest battery of
low-rise satellite buildings around the blue-roofed – hence ‘Blue House’ – main pavilion.
There was an annexe for Park’s much-feared Korean Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA),
whose chief would in 1979 assassinate him, and offices for the powerful Blue House Economic
Secretariat.
Park kept his key people very close at hand; the main reason he needed to go out was for a
daily visit to the downtown Economic Planning Bureau, whose staff could not all be
accommodated at the Blue House.
 
The general’s modus operandi was reflected in words he
wrote in 1963: ‘We need wordless deeds and ambitious construction programmes.’
91
 
His
public explanation of what he was doing was his books.
 
The rest of the time he was getting on
87
--- Page 88 ---
with the job of making bureaucrats and businessmen interact in such a way as to achieve his
industrial objectives.
 
Leading entrepreneurs were summoned to the Blue House on a regular
basis to report on their activities.
 
The most successful, like Hyundai founder Chung Ju Yung,
were received weekly.
 
Chung (who died in 2001) usually dined with Park on a Thursday
evening; his construction subsidiary
 
undertook many of Park’s modifications to the Blue
House.
Chung himself lived not far away at a second site of interest: a relatively modest, seven-room
house built on a hill near what is left of the imperial Kyongbok Palace.
 
The house, which
Chung always said was built on the cheap with surplus materials that his construction firm
had to hand, was completed in 1958, three years before Park’s coup.
 
Chung never traded up
when he became a billionaire.
 
In part his public disdain for the trappings of wealth – for thirty
years he walked the four kilometres to his top-floor office in the city centre each morning,
setting off at 7 a.m.
 
with his sons and bodyguards in tow – was framed by the culture of
austerity introduced by Park.
 
But above and beyond this, Chung was the archetypical tight-
fisted entrepreneur, conserving his capital and expecting his minions to do the same.
Chung was a driven man, getting up at 4 a.m.
 
to exercise, hold meetings and call managers
before having breakfast at 6 a.m, at which he held court over his family.
 
He was also autocratic,
and known on occasion to slap or punch his managers.
 
His main hobby was his mistresses:
several of his eight acknowledged sons were by different mothers and he had numerous
unacknowledged sons and daughters.
92
 
But most prototypical of all, Chung had the
developing country entrepreneur’s ability to spot where money was going to be made
whichever way the political winds shifted.
 
Under the Japanese he went into auto repair (one
of a very limited number of businesses Koreans were allowed to operate).
 
When the
Americans arrived in 1945, he did construction work for the US military, using his English-
speaking brother to tout for work.
93
 
Under Syngman Rhee’s congenitally corrupt
administration, he tendered successfully for civil construction projects, including the first
bridge across the Han river, finished in 1958.
Chung’s family business structure, the nature of his business activities and his personal
foibles were the same as those of the oligarchs who have dominated south-east Asian
economies.
 
In the 1950s in particular he operated in a cronyistic environment in which
kickbacks and bid rigging,
 
known locally as ‘tea-housing’, were endemic.
 
By the time of Park
Chung Hee’s coup, Hyundai Construction was one of the Big Five Korean building firms.
Chung had never made or exported anything.
 
He was just a politically astute entrepreneur
with a reputation for getting construction jobs done.
 
In post-independence
 
south-east Asia, he
would have carried on doing construction work and added more domestic business
concessions to his portfolio as the state offered them up.
 
But under Park Chung Hee in Korea,
Chung was to become a global force in manufacturing and a major exporter, first of his
construction services, and later of manufactured goods from cars to semiconductors.
Something happened to make Chung’s business develop differently.
94
 
The clue as to what is
found at a third Seoul location, a couple of kilometres south-west of the Blue House
compound.
 
It is Seodaemun, a small prison nestled between a park and a group of more
recently built high-rises.
 
Constructed originally by the Japanese, Seodaemun is maintained
today as a museum of Japanese colonial brutality.
 
However, under Park Chung Hee it
88
--- Page 89 ---
continued to serve as a convenient downtown lock-up for people who failed to adhere to his
plans for Korea’s development.
Most developing state dictators just lock up political dissidents.
 
Park also locked up
businessmen whose attention he wanted to grasp.
 
Seodaemun’s cells and torture chambers
now feature waxwork models of Japanese guards from the colonial era – ‘nail picking and
tortures with boxes and electricity’, according to the English language guide; there are even
looped recordings of agonised shrieks of pain to enhance the visitor experience.
 
However,
Seodaemun’s work continued after the Japanese departed in 1945.
 
The prison, and the
execution room in the grounds, played a leading role in Park Chung Hee’s ruthless campaign
to re-orient the course of Korean economic development.
95
 
Park had no more success than
any other dictator in cowing those fighting for transparency and institutional development –
including democracy.
 
But he discovered that entrepreneurs, so long as they were still allowed
to make money, could be bent to his will quite easily.
It was twelve days after the 1961 coup, on 28 May, that Park and his colleagues
96
 
began
arresting businessmen.
 
They did so under a Special Measure for the Control of Illicit
Profiteering.
 
There are conflicting accounts of how many businessmen were held, where and
for how long.
 
But it is clear that scores of the country’s most senior entrepreneurs were locked
up.
97
 
Seodaemun was one detention point.
 
A few top figures, including Samsung’s founder,
Lee Byung Chull, had the good fortune – or, more likely, the forewarning – to be in Japan.
But the great majority of the country’s business elite was taken in.
 
Park put the
 
frighteners on
the business community in a manner unprecedented in a capitalist developing country.
 
He
declared that the days of what he termed ‘liberation aristocrats’ – crony capitalists who bought
favours from Syngman Rhee’s government and did nothing for their country in return – were
over.
Imprisoned businessmen were required to sign agreements which stated: ‘I will donate all
my property when the government requires it for national construction.’
98
 
In effect, this put
the entrepreneurs on parole to do whatever Park required.
 
The most senior group, including
Lee Byung Chull after he returned from Japan, quickly agreed to pursue investments in
industries – mostly manufacturing ones – that the military and a handful of bureaucrats
familiar with Japanese industrialisation wanted to develop: fertiliser, synthetic fibres, cement,
iron and steel, electricity generation, and so on.
 
They formed the Promotional Committee for
Economic Reconstruction (PCER), later to become the Federation of Korean Businessmen, as
the formal channel through which big business communicated with government and aligned
itself with state objectives.
 
Samsung’s Lee was the first chairman.
 
The leading business families
also agreed to the renationalisation of banks which had been privatised to them, under US
pressure, in 1957.
 
The banks had become a destabilising source of illegal lending to their
owners’ firms, a problem that has afflicted privatised banking systems in developing states
from Meiji Japan to post-Second World War south-east Asia and Latin America.
Once he established the basic rules of the game, Park informed Korea’s businessmen that
they were free to make as much money as they could so long as they stuck by the rules.
 
Most of
the businessmen were released from prison during 1961.
 
But if they thought Park’s regime
would ease off once they were out, it soon became clear that this was not the case.
 
One early
exchange that sent a crystal clear message occurred after the chief of Lucky-Goldstar (now
89
--- Page 90 ---
known as LG), Koo In Hwoi, was released.
 
One of Park’s colonels responsible for industrial
policy told him to organise a foreign loan (which the government would guarantee) and
technology transfer for a cable factory.
 
When Koo tried to wriggle out of the task, pleading
that he knew nothing about the cable business, the colonel told him that whereas he had been
thinking of making K
oo
 
sort the whole thing out in a week, as a special dispensation he
 
would
let him do it in two weeks.
 
Ten days later, Koo was sufficiently chastised to produce a
technology transfer deal with a West German firm and the requisite financing
arrangements.
99
 
One of Korea’s richest businessmen had gotten the message.
We always wanted to manufacture …
Chung Ju Yung avoided arrest in May 1961.
 
However, he and his business were put under
scrutiny by the new junta.
 
Not to worry: Chung proved to be another quick convert to the
causes of manufacturing and exports.
 
He lobbied for, and was given, a manufacturing project
in 1962 when Hyundai Construction was allowed to build the third of three Korean cement
plants financed by US concessionary loans.
 
It was Chung’s first factory.
 
Until this point, most
cement had been imported from Japan.
 
One year after the factory began production, Hyundai
Construction was not only producing cement for Korea, it had started exporting it to
Vietnam, where the US was ramping up its military involvement.
 
It was a requirement of the
US funding for Hyundai’s first cement factory that the firm buy all its equipment from
American suppliers.
 
However an even greater measure of the changes that were occurring in
Korea was that, having mastered cement making, Chung then went on to master the
engineering behind his cement plant.
 
Within a few years, Hyundai was building cement plants
on a turnkey basis in countries like Saudi Arabia.
100
The export discipline message was not one that businessmen could miss since the Economic
Planning Board demanded the monthly reporting of export revenues.
 
In 1964, Chung sent
one of his five brothers to Thailand to look for construction projects, thinking to sell the one
thing he really understood – construction services – overseas.
 
The family put in a low-ball bid,
backed by Korean government debt guarantees, for the 58-mile Pattani–Narathiwat highway
in southern Thailand.
 
They won it, although Chung went on to lose millions of dollars on the
project, having made all kinds of rash assumptions about the equipment needed, Thai weather
patterns and the difficulties attached to cutting through a jungle.
 
But through undertaking
the project, Hyundai Construction learned from its mistakes,
 
and in the next few years the
firm picked up contracts in Vietnam, Guam, Papua New Guinea and Australia.
101
Export success drew attention.
 
In 1
967, Chung obtained the first of many one-on-one
audiences with Park Chung Hee.
102
 
The two men talked about a putative 266-mile Seoul–
Pusan expressway
,
 
a project that would link one end of South Korea to the other and which
had been discussed, but never pursued, for years.
 
Chung, now with twenty years of experience
of increasingly complex infrastructure projects, volunteered a low-cost option with steeper
gradients and less tunneling.
 
The plan was accepted and he went on to win tenders for half the
road, built between 1968 and 1970.
 
It was the biggest construction project ever undertaken in
Korea.
 
It was also the project that led to Chung being invited to his weekly dinners with Park.
He was on the inside track.
The same year the expressway deal came through,
 
Chung obtained permission to assemble
complete knock-down (CKD) car kits
 
in a joint venture with Ford.
 
He bought an 82-acre
 
site
90
--- Page 91 ---
for a car assembly plant at Ulsan in south-east
 
Korea – part of General Park’s Ulsan Industrial
Complex, his
 
favoured location for the promotion of new industrial projects.
 
Park
 
called the
complex Korea’s ‘Aswan Dam’.
 
For Chung, the car
 
venture was a toe in the water.
 
The
government was
 
encouraging domestic firms to go into kit assembly of cars
 
as a first step to
building finished vehicles from scratch.
 
In 1967, Park had published a second five-year plan
which
 
made the automotive sector a priority for development.
 
Like other
 
businessmen,
Chung was learning to pay close attention to the
 
policy documents put out by the Blue House
and the
 
EPB, because they determined where domestic bank finance, overseas loan
 
guarantees,
export subsidies, tax exemptions, reduced utility rates, tariff rebates
 
and more would be
directed.
 
Within five years of Park’s
 
coup, business was listening to government as it never had
before.
 
Meanwhile, GDP growth between 1962 and 1971 averaged 10
 
per cent a year and the
manufacturing share of exports rose from one-quarter to more than four-fifths.
103
Government and business were forging an effective partnership for
 
development, a shotgun
marriage in which Park held the weapon.
The Road to Somewhere
Driving down the Number One expressway that Hyundai Construction helped build in a
Hyundai Avante,
 
one can still see how this road – a bellweather for Korea’s industrial take-off
– was imposed on the rural society of the late 1960s.
 
The expressway cuts through mile after
mile of closely tended farmland.
 
Nearer to Seoul there are fields of fruit trees and tobacco,
which appear to be farmed on a commercial basis, but further into the South Korean
heartland evidence of the intensive household farming that supported the country’s industrial
development is unmistakeable.
 
Small plastic greenhouses and neat wooden frames with black
awnings (employed to expedite plant growth) are everywhere.
 
The rice paddies are livid green,
stuffed to the gills with fertiliser.
 
Along the banks of the paddies, families plant their home
vegetable crops: maize, courgettes, potatoes, salad leaves and the inevitable radish, onion and
cabbage required for that Korean staple,
 
kimchi
.
 
Below an elevated section of the expressway a
man with a spraying unit on his back is applying a chemical treatment to his rice.
 
Among the
forested hills, which appear to have no topographical pattern, every inch of cultivable
farmland is in use.
 
Even the land in the loop of an expressway slip road is farmed.
The urban centres, when they come, feature identical high-rise apartment blocks.
 
These
places could easily be mistaken for Stalinist factory towns, except that here the market is very
much alive.
 
The sight of low-cost, red brick churches with spires – 30 per cent of Koreans are
Christians – is also a reminder that this is not Soviet Russia.
 
Koreans – like the builders of
their presidential residence – have a weakness for blue roofs.
 
Whether using tiles or corrugated
sheets of plastic or iron, houses and low-rise factories throughout Korea go with the blue.
Combined with vast amounts of concrete, it does not look good.
 
In a rather beautiful,
undulating setting, Korea’s remarkable economic development has come at an aesthetic cost
that is rarely out of mind during the five-hour drive from Seoul to the great industrial centres
of the south-east.
 
At the end of the Number One expressway is Pusan, the nation’s second
metropolis and biggest port.
 
A little to the north of Pusan is Ulsan, now sometimes referred to
as ‘Hyundai City’, such is the local dominance of that firm.
 
But my first stop is a little further
north again, at Pohang, site of one of the world’s most efficient steel factories.
In the 1960s Pohang was an agricu
ltural town of 67,000 inhabitants.
 
Today it is an
industrial city of half a million people and home to the world’s third biggest – and most
91
--- Page 92 ---
profitable – steel producer.
 
The urban area is unremittingly bland and shabby, and separated
from the steel works by a river.
 
Outside the main gates of the Pohang Iron and Steel Company
is a big, dirty blue sign announcing ‘Clean and Green POSCO’.
 
A researcher from POSCO’s
own university and two of his colleagues wait outside to accompany me on a tour.
104
 
Once
inside we drive to the reception building where Park Chung Hee’s original inscription, ‘Iron
and Steel is National Strength’ (written in the Chinese calligraphy favoured for such formal
pronouncements), hangs on the wall of a central office tower.
The official POSCO history movie is shown on the top floor.
 
Then, with the press of a
button, curtains around the room are raised to reveal a panoramic view over the 9 million
square metre plant, with its 320 kilometres of internal roads.
 
The compound is in the shape of
a huge horseshoe encircling a bay on the sea.
 
At one end I can see a 20-day, 2 million tonne
supply of raw materials that has been offloaded from one lot of ships, and at the other the
finished steel to be loaded on to another lot of ships.
 
It is instantly clear that the place was set
up as an import
​
–export machi ne.
 
Tracking my eye clockwise from one end of the horseshoe to
the other I see: plants for sintering the iron ore and limestone and preparing the coke; a series
of 100 metre tall blast furnaces; torpedo cars that each carries 300 tonnes of molten iron to
furnaces which oxidise impurities; continuous casting plants that create semi-finished steel;
and rolling mills that turn out finished product.
 
Cars which drive around the plant have
‘
8282’ written down the side – the sound of the numbers in Korean is a homonym of ‘quickly,
quickly’.
 
Iron ore travels round the horseshoe and becomes finished goods ready for shipping
in thirteen hours; Pohang turns out 16 million tonnes of product a year.
 
The company’s
newer plant, 200 kilometres away at Gwangyang on the south coast, puts out 19 million
tonnes of steel a year in a process that takes only seven hours.
It was not easy getting the Pohang plant financed and built.
 
The Korean government tried
three times in the 1960s to move the project ahead, presenting different, detailed plans.
 
But
equipment suppliers would not advance credit and financiers – including the World Bank –
would not lend to the kind of large-scale,
 
integrated operation that the Koreans wanted.
 
A
World Bank report published in November 1968 cited the failures of major integrated steel
projects in Brazil, Mexico, Turkey and Venezuela.
105
 
In the end, Park financed Pohang by
using Japanese war reparations.
 
He put his favourite student from his teaching days at the
Korean Military Academy, a 43-year-old general called Park Tae Joon, in charge.
 
The younger
Park had already turned around a state mining company.
 
Each day workers at Pohang were
lined up in front of the main, corrugated-iron site office and told that Japanese reparations
money was being used for the project and that it was preferable to die rather than suffer the
humiliation of wasting the money.
The
 
success
 
of
 
Pohang
 
was
 
down
 
to
 
much
 
more
 
than
 
sweat,
 
tears
 
and
 
anger,
 
however.
 
First
there
 
was
 
the
 
combination
 
of
 
huge
 
scale
 
with
 
a
 
step-by-step
 
approach.
 
Pohang
 
was
 
planned
 
as
much
 
the
 
most
 
expensive
 
investment
 
in
 
Korea,
 
with
 
a
 
9
 
million
 
tonne
 
capacity
 
(versus
 
a
recommendation
 
from
 
Japanese
 
technical
 
advisers
 
of
 
2.6
 
million
 
tonnes).
 
However,
 
the
 
first
phase
 
was
 
opened
 
at
 
1
 
million
 
tonnes
 
capacity,
 
and
 
then
 
expanded
 
in
 
four
 
end-to-end
 
stages.
Tougher
 
technologies
 
were
 
left
 
to
 
later
 
in
 
the
 
learning
 
process
 
–
 
for
 
instance,
 
there
 
was
 
no
continuous
 
casting
 
of
 
steel
 
in
 
phase
 
one
 
as
 
the
 
Koreans
 
focused
 
on
 
the
 
simpler,
 
more
 
upstream
tasks.
 
To
 
start
 
with,
 
they
 
built
 
a
 
single
 
blast
 
furnace.
 
Once
 
each
 
construction
 
phase
 
was
92
--- Page 93 ---
launched,
 
POSCO
 
moved
 
at
 
breakneck
 
speed,
 
building
 
around
 
the
 
clock
 
so
 
as
 
to
 
start
 
earning
a
 
return
 
on
 
precious
 
investment
 
capital
 
as
 
soon
 
as
 
possible.
 
Construction
 
speed
 
ought
 
to
 
be
 
a
comparative
 
advantage
 
of
 
the
 
developing
 
state,
 
not
 
least
 
because
 
of
 
much
 
lower
 
health
 
and
safety
 
standards.
 
At
 
Pohang,
 
24-hour
 
building
 
contributed
 
to
 
a
 
construction cost per tonne of
steel capacity that was one-quarter that of Brazil.
106
A second driver of success was that there was constant checking of the technical advice being
received.
 
Nippon Steel was the main provider of technology.
 
Even though Japanese
reparations financed much of Pohang, POSCO went to the Australian mining firm BHP to
review all the Japanese engineering reports and to provide independent advice on equipment
procurement.
 
An ethnic Korean steel specialist who lived in Japan was then asked to review
the reports of both the Japanese advisers and BHP.
107
 
POSCO listened to everyone, and
trusted no one.
Third, the firm showed a relentless ap
plication to the job of learning everything there is to
know about a steel plant.
 
During the first and second phases of its construction, POSCO
management refused to employ the computerised control systems recommended by their
Japanese consultants lest they did not fully understand the equipment they were buying.
A hot rolling mill that opened in 1978 is still in use at Pohang today.
 
As huge slabs of steel
are passed back and forth and pressed at 1,200 degrees centigrade – throwing off heat that
makes you sweat on a gangway twenty metres above – you can still see the original manual
dials on the side of the production line indicating the gap between the top and bottom rollers.
Today the operation is computerised, but for several years engineers collected all production
line measurements by hand.
 
By the time that POSCO wanted to build a second mega-facility
at Gwangyang in the 1980s, Japanese suppliers had lost so much intellectual property to
POSCO that they were unwilling to become involved.
 
The imported equipment at
Gwangyang came from Europe.
 
By the time the final stages of Gwangyang were completed,
over half the production lines were being manufactured domestically, compared with just over
one-tenth of the equipment at the outset at Pohang.
Overarching all these reasons for success, of course, was export discipline.
 
Unlike other big,
failed steel projects, Pohang was always required to export.
 
It was encouraged to do so through
export subsidies, plus it needed foreign exchange in order to service the international debts
that financed its later phases of expansion.
 
POSCO has always shipped 30–40 per cent of its
steel overseas.
 
On paper, the firm has been profitable every year since it began production in
1973, but this should not disguise the scale of the subsidies that got it moving.
 
An Iron and
Steel Industry Promotion Law of 1970, which echoes the single industry laws that were
employed in Japan, laid the basis for POSCO to enjoy cheap electricity, water and gas, as well
as subsidised port and rail services.
 
The central government paid for much of Pohang’s
supporting infrastructure.
 
Through the 1970s and 1980s, Korea also levied a 25 per cent tariff
on imported steel that was not destined for re-export, guaranteeing POSCO surplus demand
at home so long as it achieved a reasonable level of efficiency.
Employee hours per tonne of steel shipped from Pohang dropped from 33 in 1975 to 10 in
1984 (though this
 
was still well behind Japan, at 6.5 hours in 1984).
 
With its huge scale,
POSCO had the resources gradually to begin to innovate.
 
The company opened a research
and development centre in 1977 and by 1986 exported its first technology to the United
93
--- Page 94 ---
States, when it provided the main technical input for a joint venture to make cold-rolled
sheets with US Steel in California.
 
More recently, POSCO patented its Finex production
technique, which produces molten iron directly from iron ore fines and coal without the need
to sinter the ore or cook the coal into coke.
 
The company operates at a scale where it is a
player not just in production, but also in technology.
 
Stripped of its subsidy support in the
1990s and 2000s, and now fully privatised, POSCO needs no further helping hand.
 
In recent
years its net income has been a very healthy 15 per cent of sales, which are in turn targeted to
rise from USD30 billion in 2009 to USD100 billion by 2018.
 
Warren Buffet’s Berkshire
Hathaway bought a substantial chunk of POSCO equity – a solid indicator of its long-term
profitability.
In 2003, the company opened its own museum in which it tells its side of history.
 
On one
wall there is a proud discourse about how wrong the World Bank was about the POSCO plan.
The original corrugated-iron site office has been preserved.
 
And there are more waxworks.
This time POSCO president Park Tae Joon stands next to ‘The Rat’ – as Park Chung Hee’s
rodent-like appearance led him to be known behind his back – while they detonate a charge
during site preparation.
 
After the first steel was poured on 9 June 1973, Park Chung Hee
declared an annual National Steel Day to go with the annual National Export Day he had
inaugurated in 1964.
 
This being Korea, these were working holidays.
 
Today POSCO vies with
China’s Baogang as the world’s number two steel producer, behind the giant, Indian-
controlled ArcelorMittal combine.
108
 
But POSCO’s profitability, and hence market value, is
relatively far superior to either.
 
In technical terms, it trails only the most advanced Japanese
mills.
 
At the Pohang site, 7,000 workers are now employed – less than half the number who
worked there a decade ago when output was far lower.
 
Among the next workers to go are
rumoured to be the drivers who sit below the load beds of vast, strange trucks that move coils
of finished steel around.
 
They are expected to be replaced by robots.
Doing, learning
Given the role that learning plays in economic development, factories like Pohang become the
schools in which successful developing nations learn.
 
POSCO is a kind of vocational college
that doubles as a steel maker.
 
In the 1970s and 1980s it educated a first generation of Korean
steel specialists and did so while POSCO was already producing and exporting product.
 
The
role of factory-based – as opposed to school-based – learning becomes clearer still at
Hyundai’s manufacturing hub at Ulsan, only seventy kilometres to the south of Pohang.
 
Back
on the expressway, the Hyundai Avante is returning – as it speeds past more of those bland
low- and high-rise blocks and red and brown brick churches – to the place of its birth.
 
Most of
the apartment blocks in Ulsan have the Hyundai logo – a sort of heavy, stylised C – painted
on the side.
 
As in Pohang, it is not the city area that I head for but the docks, built on the
estuary of the Taehwa river, once known as ‘the river of death’ for all the industrial effluent
poured into it, but now a little cleaner.
 
Just like POSCO’s two great steel plants, all Hyundai’s
major factories were conceived with international trade in mind and stand at the water’s edge.
Following the course of the river towards the sea, I know I have arrived at the headquarters of
Hyundai Motor Company (HMC), not because I can see a car factory but because I can see
three huge car-carrier ships moored up on the docks next to a car park the size of multiple
football fields.
 
Eight hundred and fifty-two thousand out of 1.5 million vehicles built in Ulsan
in 2009 went through this car park and on to the boats.
94
--- Page 95 ---
I check into the Hyundai Hotel, located next door to the Hyundai Department Store and
opposite Hyundai Heavy Industries (HHI) – Chung Ju Yung’s shipyard, the world’s biggest.
My room has a panoramic view of some of the massive cranes of HHI.
 
Not far away is the
HMC compound, now stretching well beyond the original
 
eighty-two acres Chung bought
back in 1967 to start the business.
 
Today, HMC covers 1,225 acres and contains five separate
factories making small cars, big cars, SUVs, hybrid energy cars and light commercial vehicles.
On top of its vehicle production capacity of 1.6 million cars and trucks, Ulsan turns out 2
million engines and 2.5 million transmissions each year.
 
It
 
is the biggest integrated car
manufacturing facility in the world.
109
Exploring
 
the
 
HMC
 
compound
 
with
 
a
 
manager,
 
I
 
soon
 
realise
 
that
 
it
 
is
 
impossible
 
to
reconstruct
 
the
 
firm’s
 
development
 
by
 
looking
 
at
 
the
 
production
 
lines.
110
 
The
 
original
factories
 
have
 
all
 
been
 
torn
 
down.
 
Unlike
 
POSCO,
 
there
 
is
 
no
 
museum
 
and
 
almost
 
no
 
older
technology
 
still
 
in
 
use
 
to
 
give
 
clues
 
as
 
to
 
the
 
learning
 
process.
 
The
 
only
 
nostalgic
 
curiosity
 
is
the
 
modified
 
Korean
 
tricycles,
 
fitted
 
with
 
crates,
 
into
 
which
 
an
 
assembly
 
line
 
worker
 
will
occasionally
 
toss
 
a
 
part
 
that
 
has
 
some
 
quality
 
defect.
 
These
 
go
 
back
 
a
 
long
 
way.
 
Otherwise,
there
 
are
 
ever
 
more
 
robots.
 
Two
 
of
 
them
 
simultaneously
 
fit
 
the
 
front
 
and
 
rear
 
windscreens
 
of
an
 
Avante
 
(known
 
as
 
an
 
Elantra
 
outside
 
of
 
Korea);
 
the
 
actions
 
take
 
thirty-five
 
seconds.
Immediately,
 
two
 
other
 
robots
 
grab
 
front
 
seats
 
from
 
a
 
conveyor
 
belt
 
above
 
the
 
vehicle
 
and
place
 
them
 
in
 
the
 
car.
 
The
 
operations
 
left
 
for
 
the
 
humans
 
are
 
so
 
monotonous
 
that
 
even
 
in
Korea
 
–
 
which
 
developed
 
off
 
the
 
back
 
of
 
a
 
50-hour
 
work
 
week
 
–
 
assembly
 
line
 
workers
 
are
permitted
 
to
 
change
 
places and do something different every
 
two hours and ten minutes.
111
As at POSCO, each year that industrial learning has taken place, fewer people have turned
out more product.
 
There are presently 34,000 HMC employees in Ulsan making 1.6 million
vehicles.
 
It took 41,000 people to make 1 million in 1994, and vastly more again to make just
400,000 in 1986.
 
The vehicles are also infinitely more complex than the cheap and cheerful
products of the past.
 
We sit in the back of a 5-litre, 300 brake horsepower Equus model.
 
It is
the new top-of–the-line luxury sedan designed to compete with the Lexus 460.
 
The manager
demonstrates Hyundai’s proprietary voice-activated radio and satellite navigation systems.
 
He
points out the new hybrid petrol–electric vehicles.
 
It is all very modern, and almost impossible
to connect back to the company founded in the 1960s by Chung Ju Yung and his brothers
with zero industrial experience.
Back in the day Chung had run a car repair shop but, as his biographer Donald Kirk noted,
he ‘had never manufactured so much as a bolt or a bearing’.
 
The brother he put in day-to-day
charge of HMC, Se Yung, always said he had no natural interest in cars.
112
 
None the less, the
Chungs’ entrepreneurial hunger, focused by strong state incentives to learn to manufacture
cars, was enough to ensure success.
 
From a first five-year plan in 1962 that encouraged kit
assembly
 
deals with foreign partners, Park Chung Hee’s government never wavered in its
intention to build a globally competitive automotive sector.
 
From 1967, a second five-year
plan jacked up the requirement for locally made parts from 20 per cent of a car’s value to 60
per cent.
 
In 1973, as the government launched its heavy and chemical industries (HCI) drive,
a plan was issued that called for ‘citizens’ cars’ made entirely from Korean parts.
 
Finally, in
1979, came a national machinery export promotion policy which made autos a key export
target.
95
--- Page 96 ---
The state’s screw was turned in the normal ways.
 
Access to bank finance was progressively
conditioned on building a truly Korean car and exporting it.
 
(In HMC’s case, in the mid
1970s this meant state loan approvals worth twenty times the firm’s paid-in capital.)
113
Firms which failed to meet local content requirements faced insuperable tariff barriers to
importing components, while firms which did play the state’s game were offered a protected
domestic market in which the government set mouth-wateringly high car prices by
bureaucratic fiat.
114
 
Wrapped around all this was non-negotiable export discipline.
 
In Chung
Ju Yung’s case, he promised Park he would export 5,000 cars in his first full production year,
1976, if he was given funding for a Korean ‘citizens’ car’.
 
He dared not admit his promise to
the foreign managers he hired for technical assistance until production began.
 
Donald Kirk
observed: ‘Then, as later, export pressure forced [technological] upgrades that would never
have happened if HMC were manufacturing only for protected domestic consumption.’
115
The only wobble in the government’s commitment to the auto sector came after Park’s 1979
assassination, during the global recession of the early 1980s.
 
Kia, which had come into car
making from motorcycle and truck manufacturing, was forced by the central government to
suspend car production for a couple of years.
 
HMC sold a minority stake to its main
technology supplier, the Japanese company Mitsubishi, to raise cash.
116
 
However, as the HCI
investments orchestrated by Park in steel and shipbuilding started to turn profitable in the
mid 1980s, government support for the auto industry strengthened again.
 
The longevity of
this support was critical.
 
HMC chose the second half of the 1980s to break into the US
market, which it did by selling a compact model called the Excel as a loss leader.
 
As each wave
of growing pain was endured, the government and the banking
 
system it controlled stood by
Korea’s car makers.
 
It was a long, long struggle.
 
HMC only produced its first genuinely in-
house engine, dubbed the Alpha, in 1991, twenty-four years after the firm was founded.
Toeholds in international markets were won battle by battle.
 
In Europe, for instance, the
Korean government told the protectionist French government that French train makers
would have a better chance of supplying the Train de Grande Vitesse (TGV) for the Seoul–
Pusan rail route if France bought Korean cars.
 
After weighing the competing interests of its
train and car producers, Paris eventually came up with a quota of 20,000 imports a year.
That the Korean government stayed the course on its industrial policy despite the doubts of
some senior bureaucrats
117
 
and the rising fury of trade partners, was essential to its building
of a globally competitive auto sector.
 
The same was true in shipbuilding, where Hyundai was
supported by a monopoly on Korean sales of offshore steel structures (such as ones required by
the oil and gas industry), a state directive that only Hyundai ships could be used to import
crude oil, and state-guaranteed loans not only for shipbuilding, but also to finance Hyundai’s
own merchant marine subsidiary – which bought the company’s vessels to smooth out market
demand.
118
 
Shipbuilding, which is a less complex business than car making, began to throw
off substantial positive cash flow in the mid 1980s and the Hyundai group then spirited much
of this cash away to support its auto efforts.
 
If controlling interests in the businesses had been
listed on stock markets, investors would never have tolerated such behaviour.
 
Yet it was the
right thing to do from a technological learning perspective.
A
 
second
 
key
 
to
 
HMC’s
 
manufacturing
 
success
 
was
 
its
 
ability
 
to
 
obtain
 
foreign
 
technology
96
--- Page 97 ---
in
 
such
 
a
 
way
 
that
 
the
 
firm
 
learned
 
skills
 
–
 
and
 
eventually
 
learned
 
how
 
to
 
originate
 
its
 
own
technology
 
–
 
without
 
becoming
 
dependent
 
on
 
foreign
 
multinationals.
 
In
 
the
 
automotive
industry,
 
developing
 
country
 
car
 
makers
 
around
 
the
 
world
 
have
 
found
 
it
 
almost
 
impossible
 
to
gain
 
technological
 
independence
 
after
 
going
 
into
 
equity
 
joint
 
ventures
 
with
 
global
 
auto
 
firms.
In
 
joint
 
ventures,
 
it
 
is
 
too
 
easy
 
and
 
too
 
comfortable
 
for
 
the
 
local
 
entrant
 
to
 
become
 
dependent
on
 
drip-fed
 
technology
 
from
 
a
 
foreign
 
partner,
 
while
 
multinationals
 
have
 
no
 
interest
 
in
helping
 
local
 
firms
 
export.
119
 
The
 
Chungs,
 
under
 
the
 
kosh
 
of
 
export
 
discipline,
 
saw
 
that
 
joint
ventures
 
impeded
 
technological
 
independence
 
and
 
so
 
avoided
 
them.
 
They
 
started
 
out
 
by
putting
 
together
 
For
d
 
Cortinas
 
from
 
kits
 
in
 
1968,
 
but
 
when
 
the
 
Americans
 
said
 
they
 
would
not
 
provide
 
further
 
technology
 
without
 
an
 
equity
 
stake
 
in
 
the
 
business, Chung Ju Yung sent
family
 
members to scour the planet for better offers.
120
The solution to the technology problem was to split up the challenge into several pieces.
First there was a 1973 technology licensing deal with Japan’s weakest scale car maker,
Mitsubishi.
 
The larger Japanese firms would not enter into such an arrangement given the risk
of creating a competitor.
 
Mit
s
ubishi Motor Company (MMC) provided the key technologies
HMC needed to produce the original own-brand Hyundai car – the Pony – in return for
licensing fees and revenue from parts sales.
 
The technologies included designs for an engine,
transmission and rear axle.
 
Next, the Chungs hired George Turnbull, the former boss of
failing English car maker British Leyland, to run their production line.
 
Turnbull, in turn,
hired six European chief engineers to plan a factory and to undertake design, testing and
production roles.
 
If Mitsubishi managers were thinking they could control the Chungs, they
soon discovered otherwise.
 
One of the first things the Turnbull team did was to reject the
engine that MMC wanted HMC to use.
 
It would have underpowered the Pony.
 
The Chungs
insisted on having the same engine that Mitsubishi was using in its equivalent vehicle.
121
Then the brothers went to Italian car designer ItalDesign to give them an independent look
for the Pony’s body.
 
And finally they picked up all kinds of other peripheral ideas from
visiting any international car maker that would receive them, including GM, VW and Alfa
Romeo.
HMC put its new car into production in less than two years.
 
The production line operated
for as little as one-fifth of the day early on because of workers’ errors and supplier problems,
and initial output featured plastic parts that snapped in the summer heat, door handles that
came off, dodgy brakes and paint that faded in weeks.
 
The early exports that Chung Ju Yung
promised General Park were offloaded at a loss in countries like Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Peru
and Ecuador.
122
 
Even after ten years’ production, in 1978 HMC was selling less than 60,000
cars.
 
However, the firm was digesting technology and it was learning.
 
By 1981, HMC built a
much larger factory and was limbering up for a big export
 
push.
 
It was at this point that the
firm sold a minority stake to Mitsubishi, ceding no management control but gaining new
designs and an agreement to take around 30,000 Excels a year badged as the Mitsubishi Precis.
The Koreans were starting to win a little respect.
 
Next, they set their sights on the biggest car
market in the world, the United States, hiring a US marketing team away from Toyota.
 
It was
a period when the US government was beginning to force Japan to rein in its car exports
under so-called ‘voluntary restraint’ agreements.
 
With Japanese car prices rising as a result,
HMC attacked the US market with the Excel, a small car that was priced one-fifth cheaper
97
--- Page 98 ---
than any of its competitors.
HMC’s US managers, backed by aggressive pricing and an advertising blitz, delivered a
remarkable feat.
 
They made the Excel the top imported compact model in the US in its first
two years, selling more than 260,000 units per year in both 1987 and 1988.
123
 
Overnight,
piddly HMC became a volume player.
 
However, the company was taking huge losses on the
exports.
 
If the American managers thought their Korean bosses could afford this for long, they
were wrong.
 
After creating a beach-head in the US, HMC moved ruthlessly to further cut its
imported component bill in Ulsan and to reduce US sales expenses.
 
Just as Turnbull and the
costly European managers taken on in 1974 were thrown a party and sent home in 1977, so
the US marketing managers and distributors who made the US launch a success experienced
swingeing budget cuts and firings in 1989 and 1990.
 
Annual sales in north America fell by
over half as HMC fought to break even.
 
Finally, in the mid 1990s, the business stabilised and
became profitable.
 
Sales began to rise again, and HMC was established as a feature of the
world’s most competitive car market.
 
This presaged the firm’s swifter success in the less
competitive and higher-margin markets of Europe.
124
As of 1991, when HMC produced the first genuinely Korean engine, its productivity levels
were, by its own analysis, still only half those of Toyota and Honda.
 
But it was in control of its
technological destiny.
 
The symbols of HMC’s technology acquisition were not foreign joint
ventures, but the Hyundai bungalows and the Hyundai hotel (where I stayed on my visit,
known formerly as the Diamond hotel) in which temporary foreign consultants were housed
while their knowledge was absorbed.
 
Once HMC and other Hyundai firms in Ulsan had what
was needed, the consultants were sent home with a bit of money in their pockets, hazy
memories of Filipina bands from the ersatz English ‘
pub’ in the hotel basement, and perhaps
even hazier memories of the seedy bars that cater to foreigners’ needs in the area.
 
From the
HMC perspective, the firm built on the foundation of government support by borrowing and
learning to develop technology rather than becoming a junky for a joint venture partner’s
technology.
 
All that remained to do beyond this was to outlast domestic rivals and gobble up
their capacity when they went out of business.
In the Korea of 1973 – which at the time boasted a car market of just 30,000 vehicles per
annum – government had offered protection and subsidies to not one but three putative
makers of ‘citizens’ cars’: HMC, Shinjin and Kia.
 
Inasmuch as the market was too small for
one producer, the licensing of three companies was ridiculous.
 
HMC posted losses every year
from 1972 to 1978, despite very high domestic car prices.
 
However, the government
sanctioned multiple car makers not to make short-term profits – which would have come
much sooner to a monopoly manufacturer – but rather to force the pace of technological
learning through competition.
 
With car prices fixed by the EPB, the firms had to compete on
quality in the domestic market, and then on exports.
 
The market leader in the earliest phase of
development was not HMC, but the now-forgotten Shinjin
 
chaebol
, operating in a joint
venture with General Motors under the brand Saehan.
 
But the conglomerate took on more
debt than it could handle, and the government put it out of business, allowing Daewoo to take
over its car-making assets in 1982.
 
Daewoo claimed that it would find a way to develop
exportable cars despite having only 50 per cent equity in the GM joint venture.
125
 
The third
original entrant, Kia, started out as a bicycle and motorcycle maker and obtained its earliest
98
--- Page 99 ---
technology from Honda, but like HMC refused to share management control.
As the domestic car market grew to hundreds of thousands of units a year in the 1980s,
other
 
chaebol
 
demanded the right to get into the car business.
 
The government let them, but
remained ruthless to any which could not service their debts.
 
Asia Motors entered and failed
in the 1980s; its carcass was thrown to an improving Kia.
 
By the early 1990s, there were four
players: HMC, Daewoo, Kia–Asia Motors and SsangYong, a four-wheel drive specialist.
Samsung was demanding to join the fray.
 
After the demise of Shinjin, HMC managed to
remain the market leader, accounting for around half of all Korean automotive
 
output in the
1980s, and hitting 1 million units of annual production for the first time in 1994.
 
It was a
position of considerable relative strength.
 
Yet Daewoo was gaining market share in the mid
1990s, while Chung Ju Yung fell out of political favour.
126
In the end, the Asian financial crisis, which began in 1997, was rather well timed from
HMC’s perspective.
 
The Daewoo group was too heavily leveraged – despite much-improved
products like its Matiz mini car – and went bust.
 
After the IMF’s intervention in Korea,
Daewoo’s car assets were sold to the company’s former partner, GM.
 
HMC was able to take
over Kia in 1998, giving it an unassailable three-quarters of the domestic Korean market
(Chung Ju Yung’s political woes were suddenly a secondary issue during the crisis).
 
SsangYong
was first reshuffled into the Daewoo Motor business, and then subject to a disastrous takeover
by the state-owned Chinese auto firm Shanghai Automotive Industry Corp (SAIC).
 
And
Samsung focused down on electronics, contenting itself with a minority stake in an
automotive joint venture in which it accepted its complete technological dependence on
Renault–Nissan.
127
 
‘They just rent out the [Samsung] badge,’ said my guide at HMC with
gleeful contempt as we wandered through the factory.
128
By 2000, HMC was clearly the Korean automotive winner.
 
It had survived savage domestic
competition to become the domestic market leader for a quarter of a century, and hit the
export benchmarks set by the Korean state.
 
The takeover of Kia signalled the emergence of a
global powerhouse.
 
After 2000 HMC also timed its entry into the critical global growth
markets in China and India almost to perfection.
 
In 2010 HMC, along with Kia, sold 5.7
million vehicles around the world, meaning it tied with Ford as the fourth biggest global auto
group.
129
 
A family business with no previous industrial experience had created one of the
world’s most successful car companies.
 
And the primary reason that it was able to do so was
state industrial policy.
Paler imitations
It had taken Japan’s Toyota thirty-six years to sell its first 10 million vehicles.
 
It took HMC,
based in a much poorer country with one-third the population, twenty-eight years.
130
 
This is
a reminder of both the extraordinary success of Korea’s manufacturing development policy
and of the fact that the world is speeding up – the country with the right policy mix has at
least the theoretical potential to develop its economy faster than ever.
 
Korea, however, had an
easy ride inasmuch as Park Chung Hee and other leaders had imbibed the fundamentals of
effective industrial policy from their former colonial masters in Japan.
 
In south-east Asia,
there was no local success story to be copied.
 
The region required one of its states to produce
the path-breaking performance delivered in north-east Asia by Meiji Japan.
 
Of all the
99
--- Page 100 ---
countries in the region, Malaysia under Mahathir Mohamad perhaps came the closest, but
nowhere near close enough.
131
In
 
political
 
terms,
 
Malaysia
 
is
 
not
 
a
 
difficult
 
country
 
to
 
understand.
 
It
 
was
 
put
 
together
 
in
 
its
modern
 
incarnation
 
from
 
a
 
patchwork
 
of
 
​
sultan-ruled
 
states
 
which
 
had
 
been
 
subjected
 
to
modestly
 
varying
 
colonial
 
arrangements
 
by
 
the
 
British.
 
The
 
colonialism
 
was
 
always
 
of
 
the
‘light’
 
variety
 
in
 
the
 
sense
 
that
 
it
 
did
 
not
 
take
 
many
 
Britons
 
to
 
run
 
what
 
is
 
now
 
Malaysia,
 
and
the
 
local
 
aristocracy
 
was
 
heavily
 
co-opted.
 
From
 
1957,
 
the
 
first
 
post-independence
 
prime
minister,
 
known
 
to
 
his
 
countrymen
 
as
 
the
 
Tunku
 
(‘The
 
Prince’),
 
was
 
Abdul
 
Rahman
 
Putra
Al-Haj,
 
a
 
rich,
 
clubbable,
 
Anglicised,
 
upper-class,
 
womanising
 
dilettante
 
who
 
took
 
a
particularly
 
long
 
time
 
to
 
complete
 
his
 
undergraduate
 
degree
 
at
 
Cambridge.
 
He
 
did
 
little
 
to
change
 
the
 
colonial
 
shape
 
of
 
the
 
economy,
 
letting
 
British
 
firms
 
maintain
 
their
 
mining
 
and
plantation
 
interests,
 
and
 
was
 
soon
 
in
 
the
 
habit
 
of
 
taking
 
cash
 
kickbacks
 
from
 
leading
businessmen.
132
 
The
 
second
 
post
 
independence
 
leader,
 
Abdul
 
Razak,
 
and
 
the
 
third,
 
Hussein
Onn,
 
were
 
also
 
of
 
royal
 
lineage.
 
Hussein
 
Onn,
 
who
 
was
 
congenitally
 
indecisive,
 
was
 
perhaps
the
 
worst
 
of
 
the
 
lot.
 
By
 
the
 
time
 
of
 
his
 
term
 
in
 
office
 
(1976–81),
 
Malaysia
 
had
 
suffered
 
major
race
 
riots
 
against
 
the
 
economically
 
better-off
 
Chinese
 
population.
 
The
 
government
 
began
 
to
use
 
part
 
of
 
its
 
new-found
 
petroleum
 
wealth
 
to
 
nationalise
 
former
 
British
 
assets
 
but,
 
with
 
the
exception
 
of
 
some
 
very
 
ineffective
 
‘import
 
substitution
 
industrialisation’
 
–
 
which
 
typically
amounted
 
to
 
joint
 
venture
 
kit
 
assembly
 
behind
 
protective
 
tariffs,
 
there
 
was
 
no
 
serious
 
or
effective
 
industrial
 
policy.
 
This
 
is
 
where
 
Mahathir
 
Mohamad
 
came
 
in.
Mahathir was born in Kedah in the
 
north of Malaysia in 1925.
 
The Tunku – who was the
son of the Sultan of Kedah – attended the English-language secondary school run by
Mahathir’s father.
 
However, the Tunku subsequently claimed that he never knew the future
premier in adolescence because ‘he was a nobody’.
133
 
Mahathir, a quarter Indian through his
grandfather,
134
 
was an outsider who grew up somewhat angry and increasingly politicised.
 
He
did not like the entitled snobbery of the Malaysian aristocracy (after being elected to
parliament, he claimed that the Tunku referred to him as ‘that Pakistani [sic]’ because of his
Indian ancestry) and he was determined to prove himself.
 
He joined the dominant United
Malay National Organisation when it was formed in 1946, and went to university in
Singapore to study medicine.
 
He made the improvement of ordinary Malays his cause,
although he grew up with a race-based view of the world that was stereotypical of the colonial
era; the Malays, for Mahathir, were genetically constrained.
 
Mahathir’s judgement of
developmental issues would forever be clouded by the fact that he spent too much time
worrying about race and not enough time understanding the basic structural requirements of
technological learning.
 
His best-known book,
 
The Malay Dilemma
, is a rambling discourse on
the plight of the Malays that contrasts powerfully with Park Chung Hee’s two books of the
early 1960s, which contained much more practical analysis of what Korea needed to do to in
order to ascend the industrial learning curve.
135
Mahathir had had his political reckoning with the Tunku after the anti-Chinese riots in
Kuala Lumpur in May 1969 left around 200 people dead.
136
 
He wrote an open letter to the
prime minister blaming his witless premiership for the killings and suggesting he was likely
playing poker – the Tunku, like many members of the Malaysian upper class, was fond of
100
--- Page 101 ---
gambling – while KL burned.
 
As a result Mahathir was expelled from UMNO.
 
The Tunku,
however, had become a political liability and was eased out of power by other senior
politicians.
 
In 1971, Malaysia introduced an affirmative action plan called the New Economic
Policy to ease racial tensions.
 
With the Tunku gone, Mahathir was readmitted to UMNO
after only three years, and a year after that he became Minister of Education.
 
When the second
prime minister, Razak, and his deputy both died prematurely of natural causes, Hussein
 
Onn
took over and in 1976 turned, quite unexpectedly, to Mahathir to be his deputy.
The entrepreneurial Mahathir then grabbed the job he wanted in order to figure out how to
change Malaysia – Minister for Trade and Industry.
 
He spent three years visiting north-east
Asia and developing ideas about industrial policy.
137
 
Asmat Kamaludin, who accompanied
Mahathir on a trip to Korea, recalls him charging round ‘about fifteen’ factories in a day and
delivering an emotionally charged speech in which he said ‘he hoped Malaysia could be like
[Korea] one day’.
138
 
At the time Malaysia and Korea had almost exactly the same
 
GNI
 
per
capita – just under USD1600 – but Mahathir could see that the Koreans were far ahead in
creating the industrial basis for further progress.
139
 
At home he got to know Japanese and
Korean businessmen working in Malaysia and began a lifelong friendship with Kazumasa
Suzuki, the local representative of the Japanese trading house Mitsui.
140
 
A development plan
began to form that Mahathir would dub ‘Look East’, in deference to the remarkable industrial
success of north-east Asia.
 
The models were the heavy industrialisation programmes of the
north-east Asian states, most obviously Park Chung Hee’s HCI drive which was just drawing
to a close.
141
 
Then, in summer 1981, prime minister Hussein Onn, not up to his job and
recovering from heart surgery, decided to step aside.
 
Mahathir suddenly became Malaysia’s
first commoner premier, and its first leader to have a cohesive development strategy.
It was Malaysia’s Park Chung Hee moment, without the coup.
 
Mahathir, from an ordinary
background, with a no-nonsense attitude, took over from the last in a line of a discredited,
self-serving elite.
142
 
As Minister for Trade and Industry he had already created a state holding
company, Heavy Industries Corporation of Malaysia (HICOM), for an industrial ‘big push’
that would encompass cement, steel, cars, motorcycles, shipbuilding, fertiliser, petrochemicals,
paper and more.
143
 
Mahathir also planned to build an expressway down the more developed
west coast of Malaysia, a longer version of the Seoul–Pusan link that had opened up South
Korea.
 
He thought Malaysia should have its own
 
sogo shosha
 
– as Japan’s giant trading groups
are called – which, as in Japan, would seek out markets and raw materials around the world for
domestic manufacturers, and provide them with trade credit.
 
As in Korea, Mahathir was ready
and willing to borrow heavily overseas to pay for his country’s
 
modernisation.
 
He understood
that, to learn, Malaysia would first have to pay.
The devil in the detail
Unfortunately, there were to be fundamental policy differences in Malaysia when compared
with Japan, Korea and Taiwan.
 
Compounded by an already lacklustre performance in
unreformed agriculture,
144
 
these differences were more than enough to derail Mahathir’s
industrial ambitions.
 
The new leader failed to grasp the need for export discipline, and on
trips to north-east Asia his Korean and Japanese hosts did not explain the dirty secrets of
protectionism to him.
 
This was hardly surprising when the self-interest of these states was
101
--- Page 102 ---
now in selling turnkey industrial plants and construction services to countries like Malaysia.
In fairness to Mahathir, however, when it came to implementing effective industrial policy, he
had no appropriate regional example to follow; all the countries around Malaysia in south-east
Asia were making bad development policy choices.
 
Mahat
h
ir could have read the first of the
great academic analyses of Japanese industrial policy, Chalmers Johnson’s
 
MITI and the
Japanese Miracle
, which was published in 1982 just as Look East was being launched.
Unfortunately, he did not.
 
Nor did Mahathir read Park Chung Hee’s books about
development policy in Korea.
145
 
Instead, he would later read – and tell his underlings to read
– a fashionable, pro-globalisation book that was wholly irrelevant to his country’s needs:
Kenichi Ohmae’s 1990 tome
 
The
 
Borderless World
.
 
Mahathir was mercurial.
 
He launched his
biggest industrialisation projects, and then began to sour on Japanese joint venture partners,
even before Malaysian bureaucrats had completed a detailed Industrial Master Plan.
146
Mahathir’s neglect of export discipline was his first error, and had effects that were quickly
apparent.
 
To help pay for its investment programme, the Malaysian government increased its
foreign debt from 10 per cent of GDP in 1980 to 38 per cent in 1986.
147
 
But, unlike Korea,
Malaysia’s export earnings from manufactured goods grew only slowly.
 
This not only
engendered an acute balance of payments problem, it left Mahathir to make critical
investment decisions without the market-based information that export performance
provided to Park Chung Hee.
 
Instead of counting exports, Mahathir trusted his own
judgement
 
about the firms and managers he was backing.
 
He tried to know more than the
market.
The second divergence from Korean experience was that Mahathir rarely employed the
private sector to lead his industrial investments and did not create competing ventures.
 
He
preferred one-off investments in state enterprises.
148
 
By not licensing more entrants in
businesses like car making, Mahathir threw away the power to cull losers.
 
All he could do was
change the management of state enterprises – firms he could not afford to let go bust because
he had nowhere else to turn.
 
Without realising it, Mahathir did just what critics of industrial
policy have often falsely accused successful industrialising states of doing: he set out to pick
winners when the effective approach was to create competition and then weed out the weak.
Mahathir further compounded this problem by forcing putative national champions into
equity joint ventures with multinational firms.
 
The arrangements made it all too easy for
Malaysian firms to develop long-term technological dependencies on their partners.
149
 
In
sum, Mahathir unwittingly set his pet companies up for a fall.
 
When the fall came, he blamed
the managers.
A third complication was that Mahathir mixed up industrial policy with affirmative action.
He came to power promising to raise up the indigenous
 
bumiputera
150
 
population.
 
In so
doing, he painted himself into a racial corner where he decided he could not use Malaysia’s
mostly ethnic Chinese and Tamil established entrepreneurs to run his new heavy industrial
investments.
 
Instead, he tried to implement effective industrial policy and create a new
generation of Malay entrepreneurs at the same time.
 
This was always going to be difficult.
 
In
the absence of export discipline and private sector competition, it was impossible.
Affirmative action led to the cruellest irony of Mahathir’s industrialisation programme.
 
He
102
--- Page 103 ---
sent
 
bumiputeras
 
with minimal business experience – frequently civil servants – to run
industrial ventures which were supposed to achieve global levels of competitiveness.
Meanwhile, Malaysia’s proven and established Chinese and Tamil private sector
entrepreneurs were not pushed into manufacturing or exports.
 
They were left to gorge
themselves on oligopolistic licences controlling services and commodities in the domestic
economy.
 
Of course these entrepreneurs had to impress Mahathir.
 
But with no manufacturing
or export requirement,
 
this was not difficult.
 
The oligarchs simply showed the premier an
efficient power station built by Siemens, or a mobile phone service based on Ericsson
technology, or giant towers designed by an American architect and built with north-east Asian
steel, and collected the rent for being able to use that imported technology efficiently.
Mahathir could be a pain to work for, but ultimately Malaysia’s billionaire elite ran rings
around him.
 
They, and their peers elsewhere in south-east Asia, remained what Park Chung
Hee had condemned after the end of Japanese colonialism in Korea as ‘liberation aristocrats’.
Mahathir’s fourth deviation from best practice was to emasculate the Malaysian
bureaucracy.
 
Industrialisation in Malaysia was all too often a one-man show.
 
As the
bureaucrat Asmat Kamaludin says: ‘It became very difficult to put your view forward.’
151
Another person who worked closely with Mahathir over many years, and who retains
considerable respect for him, is more forthright: ‘Mahathir has this supreme confidence which
is very frightening.’
152
 
No successful developmental leader in Japan, Korea, Taiwan (or
China) circumvented the national bureaucracy to the extent that Mahathir did.
 
He wanted to
conceive the strategy, do the due diligence and cut the deals all on his own.
Finally, when debt and balance of payments problems mounted, Mahathir began to lose his
nerve and flip-flopped into a rather confused hybrid economic policy.
 
In 1985 and 1986,
facing a fiscal crunch and a regional recession, he introduced aggressive tax breaks and
incentives for foreign investment.
153
 
These changes, combined with a falling exchange rate,
led to a wave of inward investment in low value-added export processing, particularly (and
ironically) by Japanese and Korean companies.
 
Exports had increased by only USD7 billion in
the five years from 1980 to 1985, but they shot up USD14 billion in three years from 1985 to
1988.
154
 
From 1987, Malaysia began to show a current account surplus.
 
However, instead of
ploughing on with its industrialisation big push as the Koreans did through oil crises and
global recessions in the 1970s and 1980s – Mahathir cut back on new projects and sought to
balance the government’s books.
155
 
A regional boom driven heavily by foreign investment
took hold in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and the GDP growth rate shot up.
 
It was
tempting to believe in these circumstances that Malaysia was making real progress in its
industrial development.
 
Indeed, it appears that Mahathir did think this.
 
In 1991, he
announced
 
his ‘Vision 2020’ – that Malaysia could, and would, be an industrialised developed
country by 2020.
 
Unfortunately, as Mahathir’s ardour for old-fashioned infant industry policy
waned, Malaysia was barely ascending the technological learning curve at all.
 
This would
become apparent in the very cold light shed on the country by the Asian financial crisis.
In the meantime, Mahathir found himself a new and influential friend in the McKinsey
management consultant, futurologist and author Kenichi Ohmae.
 
Although Japanese, Ohmae
was a vehement critic of old-school
 
dirigiste
 
Japan.
 
He looked forward to a globalised world in
103
--- Page 104 ---
which national identity would be unimportant, bureaucrats would be pushed aside and open
markets would be win–win for all-comers.
 
This sanguine outlook was an early
conceptualisation of the view now associated with Thomas Friedman’s 2005 book
 
The World
is Flat
.
 
Despite its being entirely at odds with the industrial policies that made Japan rich –
policies which Mahathir was supposed to be imitating – the prime minister was so taken with
Ohmae’s book
 
The Borderless World
 
that he ordered all around him to read it.
 
Asmat
Kamaludin, who became the top bureaucrat at Malaysia’s Ministry of International Trade and
Industry in this period, recalls: ‘You felt safe if you were walking around with that book.’
156
However, with the benefit of hindsight, the rather hasty, under-researched and breathless
tone of
 
The Borderless World
 
was a pointer to the unlikelihood of its prediction that the world
was becoming more favourable to the development of poor countries.
 
It was not a good
replacement for the work of Friedrich List.
 
Hard-nosed infant industry protection of the kind
recommended by List remains the only proven way of pushing a rising state up the
technological ladder.
 
In the 1990s, by contrast, Ohmae and Mahathir went on to plan and
launch the futuristic and widely ridiculed Multimedia Super Corridor and Cyberjaya
investment park projects around Kuala Lumpur.
 
These were supposed to foster indigenous
high technology through free market, win–win cross-border cooperation, but have done no
such thing.
157
 
Instead, the white elephant projects stand as testaments to the naivete – albeit
well-meaning naivete – of books like
 
The Borderless World
 
and
 
The World is Flat
 
that suggest
that we are moving towards a new developmental paradigm
 
in which the interests of rich and
poor nations neatly coincide.
Journey 4: Across Malaysia
Once again we need to take a drive.
 
This being Malaysia, with a Gini coefficient of around 0.5,
the car hire firm despatches a couple of peons to bring a vehicle to the house where I am staying on
the west side of Kuala Lumpur.
 
The car is a Proton Waja – the name means ‘strong’ – built by
Mahathir’s beloved national car company.
 
He put more money over more time into Proton than
into any other industrial project.
 
The Waja was the first real Malaysian car, designed by
Malaysians, with a Proton engine, and it went into production in 2001.
To my untrained eye, the Waja is no less attractive than the first generation Hyundai
Elantra, built after the Korean firm had developed its own engine.
158
 
The one mechanical
problem I had with the Waja in the course of a week was that the windshield wiper speed
adjuster was not working.
 
Apart from this the car had good acceleration, a decent ride and
went much faster than the signs at the side of the road recommended.
 
The Waja, in short, is
nothing to be ashamed of.
 
It was put on the road with a proprietary engine in less time than
Hyundai took to develop a Korean car with a Korean engine.
159
 
Yet the Waja and the models
which came immediately after it represent an industrial development peak that Malaysia has
been unable to surpass.
In order to understand why, it is first necessary to understand the degree to which Mahathir
failed to compel Malaysia’s private entrepreneurs to make a developmental contribution to
their country – a failing common throughout south-east Asia.
 
You can do this by driving up a
single street in Kuala Lumpur, the south–north downtown artery called Jalan Sultan Ismail.
Here you will
 
survey
 
the headquarters of the billionaire oligarchs who were left out of
Mahathir’s manufacturing industrialisation plans.
 
The basis of the fortunes of these
104
--- Page 105 ---
entrepreneurs tells us much about what went wrong with development policy.
 
We begin at
the south end of Jalan Sultan Ismail, at the Star Hill traffic lights, an intersection that can
reasonably be referred to as ‘Francis Yeoh Junction’, after the garrulous, ethnic Chinese
billionaire who owns all the major real
.
 
estate around it – shopping centres, five-star hotel,
office blocks.
Yeoh is one of two local entrepreneurs who, because of their construction backgrounds, are
analogues for Korea’s Chung Ju Yung.
 
His father started out building schools, hospitals and
more for the government, and had made his first fortune by the 1970s.
 
Thereafter Francis and
his brothers took over.
 
Unlike the Chungs, however, the Yeohs were not forced by
government policy into manufacturing.
 
Instead, while Mahathir launched public sector
industrial projects in 1980s, they obtained untendered domestic service sector privatisations
in sectors like power generation.
 
These were offered as part of the prime minister’s confused
vision of infant industry protection plus privatisation and deregulation.
 
In 1992 the Yeohs
obtained, without a public tender, the first independent power producer (IPP) contract in
Malaysia.
 
The terms forced the state electricity monopoly to buy their power at a very high
price and this and other infrastructure service deals brought them a river of cash without any
manufacturing or export constraint.
160
 
Everything they needed they bought from firms like
General Electric and Siemens.
 
When domestic real estate investment was no longer able to
soak up the earnings from this government largesse, the Yeohs looked offshore and in 2002
bought British water utility Wessex Water for USD1.8 billion, followed by electricity assets in
Australia, Indonesia and Singapore.
 
In the past three decades the Yeohs’ company, YTL, has
built a big, passive, profitable investment business that is, from Malaysia’s technological
learning perspective, almost entirely inconsequential.
161
A little further up Jalan Sultan Ismail from Francis Yeoh Junction, on the right at the Jalan
Raja Chulan intersection, is Wisma Genting, headquarters of the business built by Lim Goh
Tong.
 
Lim, who passed away in 2007, is the second Malaysian analogue for Chung Ju Yung.
Indeed, he is an even closer one.
 
Lim made his first fortune not just from construction, but
earlier, like Chung, from trading with the Japanese during the Second World War and then
by buying and selling war surplus civil engineering equipment.
 
Lim and his partners rigged
bids at British auctions of bulldozers and other heavy construction gear after the war.
162
 
He
then reconditioned the machinery, sold some of it and used the rest to go into mining and the
building of post-independence infrastructure including dams, bridges, roads and sewage
systems.
 
Like Chung, Lim was a robustly built man who joined in manual labour with his
work teams and camped out at construction sites.
 
Both had little
 
beyond secondary education,
but both were good with numbers.
 
Neither brooked much advice from juniors and both knew
how and when to charm or pay off politicians.
 
Just as Chung Ju Yung made the transition
from Syngman Rhee to his post-coup successors Generals Park Chung Hee and Chun Doo
Hwan, so Lim Goh Tong got along famously with every post-independence Malaysian leader,
including Mahathir.
When Mahathir became premier in 1981, Lim could have built the ambitious bridge link to
Penang island on the west coast, a key project on Mahathir’s to-do list.
 
In the early 1960s Lim
had already built the 850-metre Sultan Yayha Putra bridge near the Thai border, then the
country’s longest.
 
This being Malaysia, however, by the 1980s Lim was already out of the
105
--- Page 106 ---
infrastructure game.
 
He had never been pressed to export construction services or to go into
manufacturing.
 
Instead, while Chung Ju Yung was, at Park Chung Hee’s behest, beginning to
take on the world’s leading firms in auto making, shipbuilding and semiconductors, Lim
shifted his resources into a giant casino development.
 
In 1969, he persuaded the Tunku to give
him a licence to operate Muslim-ruled Malaysia’s first, vast and only casino at Genting
Highlands outside Kuala Lumpur.
163
 
Genting brought Lim not so much a river of cash as a
flood, running into billions of US dollars.
 
Yet despite his making enough money to fund a
major industrial business group, no requirement was ever put on him to make or export
anything.
 
Under Mahathir’s regime, Lim’s group continued to receive state concessions
including IPP and oil and gas deals, but with no developmental quid pro quo.
 
The cash piled
up, and when largely passive domestic real estate and plantation investments could no longer
consume it, the Lims began to invest in cruise ships, gaming businesses and casinos around the
world; these include, in Singapore, a USD3.4 billion casino resort.
164
Mahathir’s Penang bridge, in a telling irony, was built not by Lim Goh Tong’s construction
firm, but instead by Chung Ju Yung’s Hyundai Engineering and Construction, which
remained under perennial pressure to export construction services, even in the 1980s.
165
Mahathir’s strategy was to learn not by doing but by giving construction projects to firms
from Japan and Korea.
 
In 1984 he awarded what was then the biggest construction deal in
Malaysia’s history – for the
 
Dayabumi complex in Kuala Lumpur – to two Japanese firms,
despite the fact that local companies put in lower bids.
 
The Malaysian taxpayer footed the bill,
but Malaysians learned nothing.
166
 
Meanwhile Lim Goh Tong and his fellow Malaysian
entrepreneurs grew fat on a diet of government-provided concessions.
 
In 2003 Mahathir
wrote a foreword for Lim’s hagiographic biography in which he stated: ‘He is an exemplary
corporate citizen.
 
He has complied with perhaps every rule and regulation and policy made in
Malaysia.’
167
 
The tragedy of Malaysia is that this is largely true.
 
Unlike the Chungs of
Hyundai, or the Lees of Samsung, Malaysian businessmen were never compelled by the state
to make any form of developmental contribution.
The crisis that changed nothing
As the Waja crawls through the dense traffic of Jalan Sultan Ismail, the next major landmark
on my right serves to point up that nothing has changed in the wake of the devastating Asian
financial crisis that began in 1997.
 
The Crowne Plaza (formerly Hilton) hotel is owned by
Syed Mokhtar al-Bukhary and his headquarters is Complex Antarabangsar next door.
 
Syed
Mokhtar became Mahathir’s pet entrepreneur in the wake of the financial crisis.
 
In the final
years of his premiership, before he resigned in 2003, Mahathir lavished Syed Mokhtar with
electricity generation deals and state financing to build a new container port at Tanjung
Pelepas.
 
But once again it was without any export or manufacturing quid pro quo.
 
In time-
honoured fashion, the grateful billionaire took the cash flow and poured it into relatively
passive investments in mining, plantations, hotels and real estate – a small part of which I am
looking at now from my car window.
168
A little further north, on the west side of the Jalan P.
 
Ramlee intersection, is Menara Hap
Seng, formerly MUI Plaza, which for decades was the headquarters of fallen billionaire Khoo
Kay Peng.
 
Khoo got on the wrong side of Mahathir in the 1980s, and stopped receiving state
106
--- Page 107 ---
concessions.
 
The fall of Khoo is a reminder that state discipline was not absent in Malaysia,
just that it was not directed to appropriate ends.
169
 
On the right, beyond the strip of girlie
bars, is Rohas
 
Perkasa, a large development put up by Wan Azmi Wan Hamzah, a fallen
bumiputera
 
tycoon from before the Asian financial crisis.
170
 
Like so many, Wan Azmi rose
and fell in real estate.
 
The next block to the south is Quek Leng Chan’s Wisma Hong Leong
headquarters.
 
Quek is a banking and real estate billionaire, although over the years he has done
as much manufacturing as any Malaysian oligarch – from an air-conditioner business to
downstream steel rolling to downstream finishing of semiconductors.
 
For some reason a
London-trained lawyer is the closest thing to a private Malaysian manufacturing entrepreneur
of scale, though by Korean standards he is not close at all.
Towering above the cigar-sucking Quek’s lair are the world-famous Petronas Twin Towers
that were built by a man who has never got his hands dirty.
171
 
Ananda Krishnan, a gifted
entrepreneur, is the second-richest person in Malaysia.
 
Over the years he has stacked up a
remarkable pile of untendered government concessions that include a monopoly on racetrack
betting, oil and gas franchises, IPPs, mobile telephony licences, private tele
​
vision li cences and
redevelopment rights to a city-centre racecourse where the Twin Towers now stand.
 
When,
during the Asian financial crisis, the billions of dollars that flow annually from these state-
provided franchises were insufficient for Krishnan’s needs, Mahathir’s government stepped in
and had the state oil company buy out his towers development.
 
Krishnan represents the
apotheosis of the developmental model created by Mahathir: he runs his businesses well
enough to beat the local competition; he almost never manufactures or competes
internationally; and, in the absence of the export benchmark, he has been unsurpassed in
convincing different political leaders that he merits their attention and favour.
172
 
What
Krishnan needs technologically – from an American architect to design the Twin Towers to
the steel to support them to the base stations for his mobile phone business – he buys offshore.
As of 2011, he was worth an estimated USD15 billion.
 
His developmental contribution has
been considerably less.
173
The Waja rolls across the Jalan P.
 
Ramlee intersection, past UBN Tower to the west (for
many years the most expensive office space in Kuala Lumpur) and the Shangri-la hotel.
 
This is
Robert Kuok’s turf.
174
 
Kuok is the man who modernised the colonial rentier system in
Malaysia, accumulating plantations and commodity
 
trading operations, and winning early
government concessions to trade and process protected staple foodstuffs.
 
Worth an estimated
USD16 billion, he is the richest Malaysian, albeit one who moved his base out of Malaysia in
the 1970s and expanded his fortune through similar businesses all over south-east Asia.
Indeed, Kuok is a unique, regional exemplar of the south-east Asian entrepreneur.
 
About the
most he has ever manufactured is a flour sack.
I am at the Jalan Ampang junction which leads, on the right, to the villas of Kuala Lumpur’s
main billionaire and royalty residential ghetto, behind the Twin Towers.
175
 
Staying north on
Jalan Sultan Ismail, I see coming into view the architectural tombstones of the Asian financial
crisis – projects which were intended to extend this key thoroughfare northwards, but which
remain unfinished fifteen years after the crash.
 
Unlike Korea, south-east Asia did not pick up
where it left off in the wake of the crisis.
 
Next to the Concorde hotel is the floor plate of the
107
--- Page 108 ---
putative Ritz Carlton hotel, dream-thing of Vincent Tan, another gambling and real estate
oligarch.
176
 
To the left, down Jalan Ampang, is the half-finished Duta Grand Hyatt hotel
site.
 
North of the junction, to the east, are the few completed elements of what was to have
been RHB Vision City, a name almost as unfortunate as Mahathir’s Vision 2020.
 
Vision City
was the mid-1990s real estate entrée of financial services tycoon Rashid Hussain.
 
It was a
colossal, five-hectare joint venture with Daewoo, in which the South Korean firm was to have
supplied all the construction know-how.
177
 
The most capable Muslim entrepreneur of his
generation, Hussain was never, like his peers, required to manufacture anything.
178
 
The
graveyard stretch of Jalan Sultan Ismail ends at the Jalan Abdul Rahman crossroads, known as
Maju Junction.
 
Here on the left is the Maju tower of Abu Sahid Mohamed, the tycoon known
for his pink stretch limo who took over Mahathir’s Perwaja steel plant after the near-total
failure of the prime minister’s industrial policy.
 
The Perwaja plant is to be our next stop,
located on the other side of the peninsula.
It’s a jungle out there
The Waja picks up the ring road on the north side of the city and heads through the patch of
beautiful rainforest
 
that still exists to the north-east of the capital at the start of the cross-
peninsular Karak expressway.
 
At the petrol station near the turn-off to the Genting casino, a
troop of cheeky monkeys steals whatever they can from any motorist foolish enough to leave
possessions unattended.
 
Soon after is the exit for Vincent Tan’s Berjaya Hills Resort at Bukit
Tinggi, where Mahathir took his cabinet for a day’s retreat to learn Japanese social etiquette
and tea drinking manners in the early, heady days of Look East.
179
 
A little further on again is
the road to the town of Bentong, beyond which in October 1951 the Communist Party of
Malaya ambushed and killed the British High Commissioner, Sir Henry Gurney.
180
 
On the
south side of Bentong is the model land reform village of Lurah Bilut, built for 600
bumiputera
, Chinese and Indian families in the late 1950s, and which is now home to a small
Federal Land Development Authority (FELDA) museum.
 
A prominently displayed
quotation from second premier Abdul Razak promises ‘the best land for the best people’,
something which was palpably never more than a pipedream in Malaysia.
 
The nearby Lee
Rubber factory,
181
 
with its acrid smell and mountains of raw rubber balls, reminds us that the
government always allowed private sector middlemen to extract most of the profit from the
household farmers it feigned to support.
 
Back on the Karak expressway, the miles of large-scale
oil palm plantations – which replace the jungle after Bentong and continue to the east coast –
is the real story of Malaysian agriculture: in essence, the opposite of the commercially
integrated household farming of north-east Asia and China.
 
This is the flimsy foundation on
which Mahathir built his industrial policy.
It takes three to four hours to traverse the middle of Malaysia from Kuala Lumpur to the
shore of the South China Sea.
 
Then, turning north, the Waja crosses the state border into
Trengganu.
 
Along the sleepy white sand beaches sit under-utilised, low-rise hotels; inland are
yet more oil palm plantations.
 
It is here on the coast, outside the small town of Kemaman,
that Mahathir decided to build Malaysia’s biggest steel plant, Perwaja.
 
What you notice first
about the factory is that, unlike the original POSCO plant at Pohang, Korea, it does not have
an immediate visual logic.
182
 
Pohang forms a horseshoe shape on a bay where the raw
108
--- Page 109 ---
materials that arrive at one end have become ship-loaded steel
 
exports by the time they have
reached the other end.
 
Perwaja’s Kemaman site, by contrast, is simply a big steel factory stuck
in a field, surrounded by jungle and scrub and set back from the sea.
 
It did not begin life with
export competitiveness as its driving ambition.
 
The choice of the east coast was also
commercially dubious because most steel in Malaysia is consumed on the much more
populous and industrialised west coast.
 
It would have made more business sense to pipe the
gas fuel supply from the nearby offshore fields to the west side of the peninsula and to make
steel where it is needed.
None the less, Mahathir’s determination to marry affirmative action – by building the plant
in what is called ‘the Malay heartland’ – with industrial policy was not of itself enough to
wreck this project.
 
Instead, he made a series of compounding errors.
 
The most egregious of
these were to have no export requirement and to fail to critique the project recommended by
Perwaja’s Japanese partner, a consortium led by Nippon Steel (the same partner the Koreans
had).
 
POSCO and the Korean government paid the Australian mining firm BHP to check the
Japanese engineering plans at Pohang, and a Korean consultant from Japan to double-check
the Australians.
 
Mahathir and the Implementation and Co-ordination Unit through which
he micro-managed his industrial policy took no such precautions, accepting at face value a
Japanese proposal to produce Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) with a new, gas-based technology
that turns ore directly into high-grade sponge iron ready for steel-making without going
through the traditional iron ore sintering and blast furnace procedures.
Nippon Steel had zero operational experience of the gas technology it was selling.
 
Where the
Koreans had rejected Nippon Steel’s computerised production systems in favour of manual
ones until they understood the nuts and bolts of the most basic iron- and steel-making
processes, Mahathir went straight to the bleeding edge with technology Nippon Steel had not
used before.
183
 
Instead of Malaysia learning from the Japanese, many industry experts
concluded that it was the Japanese who learned about a new technology on the Malaysian
dollar.
 
Although Mahathir’s team was not so naive that there were no compensation clauses –
after the technology failed the Japanese consortium paid back in 1987 about one-third of the
initial project costs
184
 
– the failure of the DRI technology immediately stalled the
momentum of Malaysia’s entire development effort.
 
Perwaja was forced to operate for several
years using scrap
 
metal, of which there is very little on the east coast, and so piled up
unnecessary operating losses.
 
Dr Tan Tat Wai, one of three industry experts assembled into an
emergency task force by the government when the plant hit trouble, concludes: ‘I think
Mahathir got taken for a ride by the Japanese.’
185
Having found himself in a hole, Mahathir then started digging.
 
As would be the case with
other projects, he saw Perwaja’s problems in terms of management failure.
 
‘Unfortunately, the
first CEO was quite unable to manage,’ Mahathir says.
186
 
In his determination to change
management, the prime minister could have turned to one of several proven Malaysian
entrepreneurs in downstream steel businesses, or to one of the leading entrepreneurs outside
steel.
 
Instead, he chose Eric Chia, a bluff salesman and the son of the founder of a car trading
business, who was now involved in the firm that sold Proton cars.
 
If the premier had been led
a dance by Nippon Steel, he was to be led a much merrier one by Chia.
Given total discretion by Mahathir, the new Perwaja boss ordered up two expensive
109
--- Page 110 ---
replacement DRI plants from Mexico and some new electric arc furnaces.
 
It appears he
continued to tell Mahathir that Perwaja would produce the highest grades of steel, including
automotive sheet, for which very pure DRI sponge iron would be needed.
 
But the downstream
facility Chia actually added – 400 kilometres away, in Mahathir’s home state of Kedah – was a
large section plant for I-beams and bars needed in the domestic construction industry.
187
Perwaja has never made any high-grade industrial or automotive steel of the kind that a
country climbing the global technology ladder requires.
 
Instead it produced, at the second
attempt, DRI sponge iron of a quality that fell well below world standards, took it halfway
across the country and cast it into low-grade construction steel which was then sold only in
the protected domestic market.
 
The original DRI plant cost RM1.3 billion.
 
By the time Chia
was done, Perwaja had soaked up at least RM10 billion (USD4 billion at the then exchange
rate) of public money.
188
Just for you, doctor
Chia had claimed publicly he was taking on Perwaja as an act of ‘national service’ – as
Malaysian billionaires
 
o ften dub their faux development 
​
contributi ons  – and that he woul d
work out of a temporary cabin at the Kemaman site on a nominal salary of RM1.
 
It was the
kind of talk that Mahathir loved and, with no export requirement to benchmark progress, it
was possible for the supremely self-confident premier to believe his acolyte was turning the
business around.
 
In reality, however, Chia went to Kemaman as little as possible and was
usually to be found in his luxury office in UBN Tower on Jalan Sultan Ismail.
 
Moreover,
while he was failing to deliver any serious technological learning at Perwaja, Chia was also
bilking the business.
 
Two separate reports commissioned by the government when Chia
resigned amid rumours of huge hidden losses in 1995 (and
 
which were subsequently leaked)
revealed suspect contracts with parties connected to Chia, contracts with firms which had no
business experience relevant to what they were paid to do, purchase and sale contracts inside
and outside Malaysia which appeared contrary to Perwaja’s commercial interests, and
payments for which no paperwork existed.
 
Different scams accumulated for seven years while
Mahathir, having denied himself the verdict of the export markets, trusted his own deeply
flawed ability to judge people.
189
In
 
1996
 
the
 
government
 
took
 
a
 
colossal
 
RM9.9
 
billion
 
charge
 
against
 
Perwaja
 
to
 
clear
 
the
bulk
 
of
 
the
 
firm’s
 
debts.
 
The
 
bizarre
 
postscript
 
to
 
this
 
was
 
that,
 
despite
 
the
 
evidence
 
that
 
Chia
had
 
conducted
 
scores
 
of
 
suspect
 
transactions
 
with
 
related
 
parties
 
over
 
the
 
years,
 
Mahathir
then
 
privatised
 
Perwaja
 
into
 
the
 
hands
 
of
 
close
 
Chia
 
associates.
190
 
Abu
 
Sahid
 
Mohamed,
 
who
has
 
led
 
the
 
group
 
controlling
 
the
 
business
 
since
 
1996
 
and
 
operates
 
out
 
of
 
Maju
 
Tower
 
at
 
the
top
 
of
 
Jalan
 
Sultan
 
Ismail,
 
is
 
an
 
old
 
friend
 
of
 
Chia’s
 
who
 
was
 
granted
 
exclusive
 
transportation
contracts
 
for
 
Perwaja
 
when
 
Chia
 
was
 
in
 
charge.
 
His
 
long-time
 
associate
 
and
 
partner,
 
Pheng
Yin
 
Huah,
 
was
 
in
 
turn
 
Perwaja’s
 
exclusive
 
supplier
 
of
 
scrap
 
metal
 
under
 
Chia.
 
And
 
Abu
Sahid’s
 
accountant
 
elder
 
brother,
 
Abu
 
Talib,
 
was
 
Eric
 
Chia’s
 
chief
 
operating
 
officer
 
and
 
one
 
of
his
 
closest
 
confidants.
 
No
 
one
 
has
 
ever
 
suggested
 
that
 
Mahathir
 
did
 
anything
 
other
 
than
 
what
he
 
thought
 
was
 
right
 
for
 
Perwaja,
 
or
 
that
 
he
 
behaved
 
in
 
any
 
sense
 
improperly.
 
The
 
point
 
is
that,
 
without
 
commercial
 
feedback
 
from
 
the
 
international
 
market, Malaysia’s most visionary
leader made a series of
 
disastrous decisions.
Abu Sahid took over pristine assets
 
that were almost completely paid down by the state
110
--- Page 111 ---
because Perwaja’s second-phase investments came on line just as Eric Chia left the business.
Abu Sahid agreed to pay RM1.3 billion in cash and assumed debt for Perwaja, but only
handed over RM50 million.
 
The rest was to come, interest-free, at RM4 million a month over
ten years.
191
 
With the Perwaja shares in hand, according to his own staff as well as
government sources, Abu Sahid then successfully pressured his main state-owned creditor to
take a reduction on its debt and failed to make his payments to the government on time.
192
He also stopped paying Perwaja’s electricity bills, calculating – quite rightly – that the state-
owned provider, Tenaga, would not cut off the national steel project.
 
After a period of limbo
in which he reduced Perwaja’s operating costs, a cyclical upswing led to rising steel prices in
the 2000s.
 
Abu Sahid sold off some Perwaja equity to associates and managed in August 2008,
just before the global financial crisis, to list more on the Kuala Lumpur stock exchange.
193
Despite the listing, a decade after he ‘bought’ Perwaja, Abu Sahid and his associates still owed
the government for it.
In manipulating the Malaysian government, Abu Sahid showed at least as much
entrepreneurial flair as Nippon Steel or Eric Chia had.
 
He is proof positive that Malaysia’s
bumiputeras
 
have no less entrepreneurial capability than any other racial group.
 
The problem
is that, because of government policy failure, Malaysian private entrepreneurship is directed to
ends that do not benefit the country at large.
 
Abu Sahid, like the rest of the country’s big-time
entrepreneurs, is an asset trader, not a developer of technological capacity.
 
From the outset, he
handed over operational control of Perwaja to his steel trading associates, the Pheng
family.
194
 
They in turn, as traders rather than manufacturers, left the original on-site
management in place.
 
The general manager of plant operations at Kemaman has been there
since inception in 1984.
 
The general manager of the DRI plant has been there since the
replacement facility was planned in 1991.
195
 
The operational staff – and the technological
learning process – have remained cocooned for decades while an entrepreneurial pantomime
has developed around them.
In Korea, POSCO started production in 1973 with a 1 million tonne a year operation at
Pohang, ramping up to 9 million tonnes of world-class output by 1983, and involving an
investment of USD20 billion at today’s prices.
 
In Malaysia, Perwaja started out with 1.5
million tonnes of output and got stuck, both in volume and quality terms.
 
With no export
discipline, a succession of carpet-baggers filled their boots as the taxpayer shelled out the
equivalent of USD6–8 billion in today’s money in order for the country to learn next to
nothing.
196
Things could only get better
The failure of Perwaja broke the potential link between high-grade steel output and
Mahathir’s other ambitions for value-added manufacturing.
 
The most obvious of these was
car making, where Malaysia has had to continue to import sheet steel.
 
With more than 5
million cars sold by Malaysian firms between the first Proton in 1986 and 2010, a lot of
potential business went begging, even without considering demand from other users of high-
grade flat steel products, such as foreign car assemblers and the large, foreign-dominated
consumer electronics industry.
The Waja heads back past the plantations that blanket the country’s orange earth to the
111
--- Page 112 ---
industrial west coast.
 
Here, three different sites account for the domestic car industry.
 
Seventy
kilometres north of Kuala Lumpur, off Mahathir’s north–south expressway at Tanjung
Malim, is Proton City, a manufacturing plant that was opened in 2004, shortly before political
support for the ‘national car project’ fell apart.
 
(The political trigger was Mahathir’s 2003
resignation.) Closer to the capital, but still on its north side in a rural area outside Rawang, is
the plant of Perodua, a second auto manufacturer that was set up in 1993 to make mini cars, as
a complement to Proton’s larger passenger vehicles.
 
Finally, on the south-west side of Kuala
Lumpur, in the capital’s key commercial district of Shah Alam, is the original Proton
manufacturing facility, which still acts as the firm’s headquarters.
Each of these three destinations sends the same message: that, unlike Hyundai’s Ulsan
complex with the giant car carriers tied up on the docks outside, none was chosen with exports
in mind.
 
Moreover, the car models displayed in the headquarters of Proton and Perodua make
it clear that little competition between the firms is envisaged: Proton makes bigger cars,
Perodua makes smaller cars.
 
Korea began its automotive industrialisation drive in 1973 with
an annual
 
domestic car market of only 30,000 units, but set up three private firms to compete
directly with one another.
 
When Malaysia kicked off its national car project in 1983, it already
had a domestic market of 90,000 units a year, yet government sanctioned a single state-owned
manufacturer.
197
 
A decade later, a second manufacturer was added, but one making vehicles
that were explicitly intended not to compete against those of the first firm.
198
 
In both cases
Mahathir, negotiating personally,
199
 
insisted on equity joint ventures with Japanese car
makers: Mitsubishi (the same partner Hyundai managed to obtain its technology from
without an equity joint venture)
200
 
for Proton, and Toyota’s small-car affiliate Daihatsu for
Perodua.
 
Mahathir claims that ‘I decided to adopt Japanese and Korean strategies and
methods for developing Malaysia.’
201
 
But what he did was completely different.
At Hyundai, Chung Ju Yung was persistently suspicious of MMC’s objectives.
 
He brought
in independent European engineers who alerted him to the Japanese firm’s attempt to supply
Hyundai with a second-rate engine.
 
Mahathir was less hard-headed.
 
The difference may be
that Chung was a proven business entrepreneur, whereas Mahathir was someone who had
meddled in various businesses in his youth but was really a political entrepreneur.
202
Whichever, in Malaysia, having signed a deal to build a variant of the Mitsubishi Lancer
rebranded as a Proton Saga, MMC was able to: sell the joint venture superannuated
production equipment; slow down the pace of content localisation; keep prices of its own
components far above world market prices; and build a car which Japanese managers knew
would not meet safety standards for export to developed country markets.
 
When Mitsubishi
was forced to localise components, it frequently did so through Japanese joint ventures which
kept most technological learning out of Malaysian hands.
203
 
It appears that Mahathir did not
include specific export requirements in the original MMC contract; when he did begin to
demand overseas sales, the Japanese partner was less than helpful, saying it would take two
years to incorporate the safety changes necessary to enter the US market.
204
Proton–Mitsubishi was a classic example of how equity joint ventures with multinationals
have failed to impart adequate technological learning to aspiring car makers around the world.
The interests of the two parties were necessarily conflicting.
 
As with Perwaja, when things
112
--- Page 113 ---
went wrong at Proton Mahathir turned his wrath o
n management.
 
After only two years of
production, in 1988 he got rid of his senior
 
bumiputera
 
managers and asked the Japanese to
take charge.
 
MMC executives then happily shelved plans to export to the United States and
concentrated instead on making money out of the protected domestic market.
205
 
They had
no interest in selling at a loss in America in order to develop a globally competitive business;
they preferred instead to sell in Malaysia at artificially high prices to support their bottom line.
Outstripping Perwaja
Mahathir maintained that his industrial policy copied those of Japan and Korea, but what he
was actually doing was closer to the import substitution industrialisation (ISI) which had
failed to deliver substantial technological learning in south-east Asia in the 1950s and early
1960s.
 
Without domestic competition and a strong export focus he was repeating past
mistakes – ones that north-east Asian states had figured out how to avoid.
 
None the less, even
Mahathir’s pale imitation of Hyundai produced some positive results.
 
His constant
imprecations to localise production saw local content of both Proton cars and other brands
assembled in Malaysia increase substantially, from only 10 per cent before 1980 to over 60 per
cent by 1990.
 
Former assemblers of imported car kits went into parts manufacturing, and
some of them began to export components.
 
Mitsubishi buried the plan to sell Protons in the
US, telling the Malaysians to look instead at small Third World markets like Jamaica,
Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, but Mahathir’s government obtained tariff-free access to the
United Kingdom for 14,000 cars a year off its own bat.
 
The premier lacked direction, but not
energy.
 
When Proton sold more than 10,000 units in its first year in the UK and the Saga was
named one of the ten best economy cars by a British national newspaper, it was a faint echo of
Hyundai’s remarkable early success in the United States.
206
By
 
1993
 
Mahathir
 
had
 
tired
 
of
 
Mitsubishi’s
 
high
 
costs
 
and
 
technological
 
foot-dragging
 
and
decided
 
to
 
return
 
Proton
 
to
 
Malaysian
 
management.
 
This
 
time
 
he
 
turned
 
to
 
a
 
private
 
sector
bumiputera
 
entrepreneur,
 
Yahaya
 
Ahmad,
 
whom
 
he
 
eventually
 
allowed
 
to
 
buy
 
out
 
the
government’s
 
controlling
 
interest
 
in
 
Proton.
 
Yahaya
 
turned
 
out
 
to
 
be
 
a
 
more
 
serious
proposition
 
than
 
either
 
Eric
 
Chia
 
or
 
Abu
 
Sahid.
 
Just
 
as
 
Chung
 
Ju
 
Yung
 
had
 
in
 
Korea,
 
he
began
 
looking
 
to
 
outside
 
consultants
 
and
 
third
 
party
 
technical
 
collaborators
 
to
 
reduce
Proton’s
 
dependence
 
on
 
Mitsubishi.
 
He
 
bought
 
British
 
specialist
 
auto
 
firm
 
Lotus,
 
not
 
because
he
 
wanted
 
a
 
maker
 
of
 
sports
 
cars,
 
but
 
in
 
order
 
to
 
learn
 
through
 
the
 
firm’s
 
successful
 
Lotus
Engineering
 
consultancy
 
arm.
207
 
After
 
Yahaya
 
was
 
killed
 
in
 
a
 
helicopter
 
crash
 
in
 
1997,
 
his
deputy,
 
Mahaleel
 
Bin
 
Tengku
 
Ariff,
 
took
 
over
 
and
 
continued
 
the
 
strategy.
 
Lotus
 
Engineering
helped
 
to
 
redesign
 
the
 
Saga
 
and
 
to
 
develop
 
new
 
models
 
with
 
a
 
more
 
distinctive
 
Proton
 
look.
The
 
first
 
car
 
designed
 
by
 
Proton
 
itself,
 
the
 
Waja,
 
was
 
launched
 
in
 
2001
 
and
 
soon
 
after
 
it
 
was
running
 
on
 
a
 
Proton
 
Campro
 
engine
 
developed
 
in
 
conjunction
 
with
 
Lotus.
 
In
 
2004,
 
with
 
a
domestic
 
car
 
market
 
surpassing
 
400,000
 
units
 
a
 
year,
 
Proton
 
boasted
 
a
 
60
 
per
 
cent
 
market
share
 
and
 
opened
 
the
 
first
 
phase
 
of
 
its
 
Proton
 
City
 
manufacturing
 
operation.
 
Management
envisaged
 
an
 
integrated
 
automotive
 
town
 
with
 
a
 
quarter
 
of
 
a
 
million
 
inhabitants
 
where
 
the
company
 
could
 
consolidate
 
its
 
activities
 
along
 
with
 
those
 
of
 
its
 
suppliers.
 
Between
 
2000
 
and
2005,
 
Proton
 
cut
 
its
 
annual
 
parts
 
spend
 
with
 
Mitsubishi
 
from
 
around
 
RM1
 
billion
 
to
 
RM600
million.
 
In
 
2004,
 
the
 
firm
 
also
 
acquired
 
Italian
 
motorcycle
 
maker
 
MV
 
Agusta,
 
which
 
provided
technical
 
consultancy
 
on
 
a
 
mini
 
car
 
project incorporating motorcycle-related technology.
208
113
--- Page 114 ---
This, however, was a high-water mark that was not to be surpassed.
 
Although Proton had
developed a domestic business turning over billions of dollars a year, and had much increased
its technological capacity since the mid 1990s, it did little more than flirt with international
markets and still lacked global competitiveness.
 
It was, for instance, able to avoid putting
airbags or anti-lock braking systems (ABS) in cars sold in the protected domestic market, even
though a lack of them made the cars unexportable to many markets.
 
Whereas, by
manufacturing more cars for export and so reducing unit costs for all production, Hyundai
was able to produce its Elantra not just with front airbags, but with lateral ones as well, in all
models and all markets.
 
Mahaleel insists that an all-out Hyundai-style export drive was
impossible because other areas of Malaysian industrial policy, especially steel, had failed,
rendering supplier costs too high.
 
‘Korean industry was working simultaneously,’ he says.
‘Malaysia could not do it … Perwaja was supposed to do sheet steel and never did.’
209
Proton’s current chairman and one of the original project members from the early 1980s,
Nadzmi Mohd Salleh, disagrees.
 
He suggests that Mahaleel’s nine-year tenure without an
export assault was fatal: ‘[His strategy] was niche and domestic,’ says Nadzmi.
 
‘In my opinion
it was the biggest mistake.’
210
 
By the end of his tenure, Mahaleel had six different car
platforms in place and was ready to produce twenty different models, but overseas sales
remained an afterthought.
Return of the political aristocracy
In the end, Proton’s ongoing investment demands and the wider costs of the Asian financial
crisis – which not only saw Mahathir renationalise the car firm but also bail out a roster of far
less productive business cronies (including his own family)
211
 
with billions of dollars of
public money – began to sap the Malaysian will to carry on with the national car project.
There was also the looming challenge of the Association of South-east Asian Nations
(ASEAN) free trade area (AFTA), which since 2003 has given preferential tariffs to goods
with only 40 per cent local ASEAN content.
 
This threatened a potentially murderous blow to
infant industry projects competing with Japanese plants located in ASEAN, although Proton
and Perodua have so far been (illegally) shielded from AFTA’s requirements.
212
 
The fatal
development for Proton, however, was the unexpected resignation of Mahathir in 2003.
 
He
had made himself Malaysia’s one-man industrialisation policy and without him Proton lacked
an ideological defender.
Malaysia returned to government by its traditional high-born elite in the form of Abdullah
Badawi.
213
 
In 2005 the new administration chose not to renew Mahaleel’s contract and
forced Proton to get rid of the recently acquired MV Agusta, and hence its mini car
ambitions.
214
 
With Abdullah telling colleagues, ‘I’m not into big projects’,
215
 
but offering
no clear statement of intent on industrial policy, morale at Proton sagged and large segments
of senior management decided to move on.
 
In the absence of government support, component
suppliers were unwilling to risk further capital expenditures, meaning that production
upgrades ceased.
 
Proton was stuck with 90 per cent localised manufacturing at uneconomic
volumes and no further investment and subsidy.
 
It was forced to cut the number of car
platforms from six to three and
 
market share began to erode, from 60 per cent in the early
2000s to 30 per cent today, with the big drop occurring in 2006 right after government
114
--- Page 115 ---
support was withdrawn.
216
Ultimately
, without the cash to finance new models, a company which had learned to make
its own cars and engines came full circle.
 
It was forced to sign new deals with Mitsubishi to
rebadge MMC vehicles as replacements for the indigenous Proton cars it had developed.
 
The
next Waja will be a rebadged Mitsubishi Lancer – a newer version of the car that became the
original Saga.
217
 
My genuine Malaysian Waja, sitting stoically in the car park of the Proton
headquarters in Shah Alam, is the automotive equivalent of the Last of the Mohicans.
The standard criticism of Proton in Malaysia today is that the business had two decades to
prove itself before Mahathir stepped down, and it did not.
 
Yet when compared with
Hyundai’s experience in Korea, this judgement may be unfair.
 
Twenty years after the 1973
Korean national car programme was announced, a report by the Boston Consulting Group
(BCG) concluded that the Korean car industry might not see out the decade.
 
In 1992
domestic firms had a production capacity of 3.5 million cars, but sold only 1.7 million;
productivity was still only half the Japanese level; and Korean cars had a poor reputation for
quality in overseas markets.
218
 
Yet, with the benefit of hindsight, by the early 1990s firms like
Hyundai had already turned the technological corner in automotive manufacturing and sales
would soon begin to reflect this.
 
All technological learning, like all education, takes a long time
and involves a lot of errors.
 
As one Hyundai quality control manager put it, the secret of
technological progress is ‘not repeating the same mistake’ over a very long period of time.
219
Proton’s rate of technology acquisition does not appear to have been slower than
Hyundai’s.
220
 
However, in Korea the government provided an extraordinary level of
protection to auto makers for three decades, from 1970 until 2000, and quite a lot
thereafter.
221
 
In the early 1990s, Hyundai was able to set up complete knock-down (CKD)
kit
 
assembly plants for light trucks and cars in Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines and
Indonesia.
 
Such investments by foreigners would have been unthinkable in Korea.
222
 
If
anything, the story in Malaysia is that government has lacked patience and tenacity with its
industrial policy.
 
This cannot be said to be the fault of Mahathir alone, although he did
 
fail to
empower a bureaucracy with an institutional commitment to infant industry development,
such as existed in the Economic Planning Board in Korea or MITI in Japan.
Mahathir’s major responsibility is for not enforcing export discipline, and for not fostering
more private sector competition, which would have allowed him to cull and consolidate
failing market entrants.
 
The debacle in steel, where the prime minister’s personal performance
is particularly difficult to defend, made things harder in automotive, where Mahathir and
Proton came closer to success.
 
The final verdict must be that Malaysia learned something
under Mahathir’s industrialisation policy, but not enough.
 
Malaysia today is a bit like a
country that went to school and college for twenty years but failed to pay sufficient attention
and now finds itself ill-equipped to live at the economic level to which it aspires.
 
When
Mahathir became prime minister in 1981, he had seen with his own eyes that Korea had the
kind of focused industrialisation policy that his country needed.
 
The university-educated
headmaster’s son knew that, in order to compete, Malaysia had to engage in industrial
learning, but he failed to organise the process anything like as effectively as the peasant-born
Park Chung Hee.
 
When Mahathir stepped down in 2003, Malaysian
 
GNI
 
per capita was no
115