
--- Slide 1 ---
How the World Became Rich
Chapter 3
Is It All Just Institutions?


--- Slide 2 ---
What are Institutions? Why do They Matter?
Economists since Adam Smith have understood that institutions matter for economic growth.
But mid-20th c. economists focused on questions of capital accumulation (physical and human capital), investment, and technological innovation. 
Evident in both the Harrod-Domar model and the Solow-Swan model. 
Douglass North’s insight in the 1970s was that capital accumulation and innovation were only the proximate cause of growth. In a sense, they were manifestations of growth. 
But what causes individuals to invest in physical or human capital? 
North argued that responses to society’s incentive structures (e.g., why individuals do or do not invest or innovate) provide a deeper explanation of economic growth.

--- Slide 3 ---
Institutions as Rules of the Game
The rules of soccer incentivize players to do certain actions. 
The rules of rugby incentivize individuals to do different actions. 

--- Slide 4 ---
What Institutions In Particular?
Economic Institutions
Security & flexibility of property rights
Free entry (to ensure competitive markets)
Ability to form business organizations
Ability to quit and move jobs
Political Institutions
Political rights
Constraints on the executive
Democracy
Free media
Independent Judiciary 

--- Slide 5 ---
The Rule of Law

In modern data there is a positive relationship between the rule of law and per capita GDP. 
This is an example of a positive relationship between a certain type of institution and economic development. 

Rule of law index, 2017, by percentile
Rule of law index vs. per capita GDP

--- Slide 6 ---
A Natural Experiment: South Korea vs. North Korea
North and South Korea provide a “natural experiment” for the importance of institutions.
Prior to the Korean War, North and South were highly comparable (if anything the North was more industrial). 
Today South Korea is a rich country. North Korea is mired in poverty.
Given geography and culture are similar above and below the 38th parallel, this suggests that institutions can make all the difference! 

--- Slide 7 ---
Caveats
We rarely see natural experiments as clean as North versus South Korea. 
Cross-country estimates of the benefits of particular institutions may be confounded (by culture, agricultural conditions, human capital, or disease environment). 
The definition of which institutions are likely to be good for economic development may be unclear.

For most cross-country regressions, the sample size is quite small (often 50-70 but at most around 150). 
Measuring institutions is fraught with difficulty. 


--- Slide 8 ---
The Legal System
The legal system is a meta-institution.  
Small-scale societies can support cooperation without a formal legal system. 
But as societies get larger this becomes more difficult. 
One of the earliest legal systems that has survived was the Code of Hammurabi (c. 1755 BCE). 
The Code of Hammurabi, however, falls short of modern notions of the rule of law.
In particular, the laws depend on the status of individuals involved. 
They were identity rules (i.e., individuals were treated differently based on their identity), not general rules. 


--- Slide 9 ---
The Legal Origins Hypothesis

The legal system is a meta-institution. 
Scholars like Dicey (1908) and Hayek (1960) argued that English common law was particularly good at protecting property rights.
La Porta, de Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998) found that countries with English legal origins had better protections for investors and that this had important implications for financial development. 
Legal origins around the world
Source: Shleifer, de Silanes, and Porta (2008). 

--- Slide 10 ---
Political Institutions
Political institutions govern how resources are distributed in a society. 
A commonly used measure is the Polity Score which scores countries from -10 (absolute autocracy) to 10 (absolute democracy). 
Another measure is the Democracy score (0-10). 
Institutional economists argue that political institutions matter for growth because they shape the incentives to engage in productive or unproductive activities.
The evidence for whether democracy itself promotes growth is mixed. 


Polity Score, 2017
Democracy Score, 2017

--- Slide 11 ---
Inclusivity & Open Access
One key feature of political and economic institutions: how broadly power is distributed.
Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) distinguish between inclusive and extractive political and economic institutions.
North, Wallis, and Weingast (2009) distinguish between closed-access orders (natural states) and open access orders. 

--- Slide 12 ---
Applying the Institutional Framework: Europe’s Commercial Revolution

Historians call the economic expansion in Europe in the period 1000-1300 “the Commercial Revolution”. 
A period of extensive growth (high GDP and population growth, not necessarily higher GDP per capita).
Universities were founded in Bologna, Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge. 
The importance of markets grew. Trade and urbanization increased.  

Source: https://commons.princeton.edu/mg/the-rise-of-specialist-production-in-western-europe-from-950/

--- Slide 13 ---
Applying the Institutional Framework: Europe’s Commercial Revolution
Prior to the Commercial Revolution, Europe had largely been rural.
After 1000 an urban economy emerged based on interpersonal trade.
Banking and other financial innovations emerged in the Italian city states. Commercial partnerships became common. 
How was this expansion of market activity made possible?

--- Slide 14 ---
Applying the Institutional Framework: Europe’s Commercial Revolution

Merchants faced what Greif (2006) calls the “fundamental problem of exchange”.
Absent third-party protection, merchants could easily be cheated.
This limited trade to spot transactions or trade between merchants who repeatedly interacted (i.e. personal, not impersonal, exchange). 

Institutions were critical in supporting the transition from personal to impersonal trade.
In Muslim North Africa, Jewish merchants relied on an information sharing networks to exclude merchants who cheated.
In France, the Champagne fairs emerged in order to support trade. 
Merchant guilds also played a role in supporting trade.


--- Slide 15 ---
Political Institutions During the Commercial Revolution

The most fundamental political institutions: those that govern the selection of who rules.
Today one of the most important distinctions is between democracy and autocracy. 
Democracy emerged in the ancient Greek city-states. 
BUT, democracy was absent for most of medieval and early modern European history.
Two important developments that DID occur between 1000-1300: 
The rise of independent city-states
The rise of parliaments




--- Slide 16 ---
Political Institutions II: City States
Independent cities emerged in Italy, the Low Countries, and Germany after c. 1000 CE. 
These cities were self-governing and often oligarchic. 
They were governed in the interest of the mercantile elite.
As such they often passed laws and established institutions favorable to trade.



--- Slide 17 ---
Political Institutions III: Parliaments
In contrast, England, Spain, and France were governed by territorial monarchies. 
Kings in these territories called councils of their leading nobles in order to consult them. 
Over time these councils became more formal. 
By the 1240s in England, they had acquired the name Parliament. Elsewhere in Europe, they were called cortes, estates, or parlements. 
These were forums where the king could ask for taxes from the “political nation”. 
In England, the “Model Parliament” of 1295 established the principle that the towns would be represented. 


--- Slide 18 ---
The Rise (and Fall) of Representative Institutions in Medieval Europe
Number of Parliaments per century, 1100-1700
Tax revenue per capita, 1500-1900

--- Slide 19 ---
Institutions and the Falling Cost of Capital
Representative institutions mattered for the cost of capital in medieval and early modern Europe.
Kings paid high interest rates on their loans due to the uncertainty that they would repay. 
City states and (later) parliamentary regimes could borrow at lower rates. 
Interest rates in city-states and territorial states, 1200–1800

--- Slide 20 ---
Chapter Summary
Institutions shape incentives to engage in productive or unproductive activity. 
Evidence from North and South Korea and East and West Germany suggests that political and economic institutions are of fundamental importance for understanding differences in incomes across countries. 
But which institutions matter?
Institutions that support markets, such as the legal system, have attracted the most attention. 
In medieval Europe, institutions that facilitated impersonal trade and constrained rulers were important in explaining the Commercial Revolution. 
Institutions such as Parliaments help to explain the rise of northwestern Europe after 1500.
