
--- Slide 1 ---
How the World Became Rich
Chapter 5
Fewer Babies?


--- Slide 2 ---
Demographic Realities in the Preindustrial World
Even in the richest parts of the preindustrial world, life expectancy was low.  
In England in 1700, it was 38.5 years at birth (considerably higher than in the Roman Empire or in France). 
Even the richest individuals could not escape biological realities. Queen Anne (1702-1714) had 17(!) pregnancies but none of her children survived into adulthood. She died at 49.  
In this chapter we ask how demography shaped the fortunes of preindustrial society and provided the conditions for the emergence of sustained economic growth. 

--- Slide 3 ---
Life Expectancy 
Evidence from Roman Egypt suggests that life expectancy was around 27-28 years at birth (Harper 2017).
Today life expectancy is much higher even in the poorest countries than in the preindustrial world, and it is positively associated with income per capita. 
Life expectancy around the world, 2015
Source: Roser (2021)

--- Slide 4 ---
Infant Mortality
Infant mortality was high in the preindustrial world. 
Harper (2017) suggests that 30% of babies born in the Roman world may have died before their first year. 
Premodern England had lower infant mortality. But it was still high. Of 1000 infants surviving their first month of life in 1650-1699, 761 would reach 15. The figure for 1800-1837 was 778 (Wrigley and Schofield 1983). 


--- Slide 5 ---
The Malthusian Model 
In 1798, Thomas Malthus proposed a simple model:
As income rises, more children survive to adulthood.
As income rises, fewer people die each year.
As population increases, income per capita decreases. This is due to the diminishing marginal product of labor. This is the idea that when there are only so many jobs to do, every additional person added to the workforce will be less productive than the last.
Hence, in the long run, population growth will absorb any gains in income


--- Slide 6 ---
The Malthusian Model
What happens if there is a fall in the birth rate? 
Since the death rate schedule is unchanged, the population falls. As the population falls, the marginal product of labor rises. 
In equilibrium, per capita income increases to y**. This increase is permanent. 
An increase in the death rate also raises per capita income.
In contrast, a one-off improvement in technology will only led to a temporary increase in income per capita. 

--- Slide 7 ---
The Malthusian Model
The Malthusian model has several predictions: 
An inverse relationship between between population growth and real wages/per capita income. 
Per capita income and real wages are stationary in the long-run.
Technological development is associated with greater population density but not higher incomes in the long-run.
Population and wages in England, 1209–1750
Sources: Galor (2005) and Clark (2010)

--- Slide 8 ---
The Malthusian Model
Ashraf and Galor (2011) show that a Malthusian framework explains many features of the preindustrial world. 
Specifically, countries that underwent the agricultural transition earlier or had more productive land had higher population densities in 1500. 
But they did not have higher per capita incomes.


--- Slide 9 ---
The Black Death

The Black Death was the largest demographic shock in European history. 
Mortality rates varied from 20-60%. Average mortality was between 40-50%.
The shock of the Black Death provides an opportunity to test the Malthusian model. 

--- Slide 10 ---
The Black Death
In England and Italy, the evolution of real wages and population after the Black Death support the Malthusian model: population decrease → wages increase. 
But in Spain, population and wages decreased. 
Moreover, in all three countries per capita GDP rose less than real wages. 
This suggests that the Black Death shock had a negative impact on trade and the division of labor that went beyond the scope of the Malthusian model. 

--- Slide 11 ---
The Black Death
The demographic shock of the Black Death interacted with institutional change.
Elites attempted to limit the rise in real wages (e.g., the Statute of Laborers, 1349). But these attempts were unsuccessful in the long-run.
Serfdom disappeared in much of Western Europe. 
Voigtlaender and Voth (2013) argue that the Black Death pushed Western Europe into a new equilibrium:
With a higher death rate;
More urbanization; 
Higher per capita incomes. 


Black Death mortality rates (%) in 1347–52
Source: Jedwab, Johnson, and Koyama (2019)

--- Slide 12 ---
The Black Death and the European Marriage Pattern (EMP)
In the Malthusian model, fertility restraint can raise per capita incomes. 
Before modern contraceptive technologies, the most effective way a society could regulate fertility was through average age of marriage.
Hajnal (1965) observed that west of a line from St. Petersburg in the North to Trieste in the South, age at first marriage and the proportion unmarried was systematically higher than elsewhere in Eurasia. 
These practices may have been present earlier. But many scholars argue they were strengthened after the Black Death. 
The EMP was most developed in Northern Europe (England, the Netherlands, Scandinavia, parts of Germany). 

The Hajnal Line
Source: Plakans and Wetherell (2005, p. 108). 

--- Slide 13 ---
The EMP and the Rise of Northwestern Europe?
Average age of marriage was around 25.
Associated with nuclear families and with the practice of working outside the home before marriage (especially as a servant). 
Some scholars argue that it also spurred economic growth. 
Voigtlaender and Voth (2013) argue that it complemented the switch to pastoral agriculture in northwestern Europe. 
de Moor and van Zanden (2011) argue that it spurred the development of labor markets, especially for women.
Foreman-Peck (2011) argues it was associated with human capital investment. 
Fertility and female age of marriage in England, 1590s–1830s
Sources: Wrigley, Davies, Oeppen, and Schofield (1997, p. 130) and Galor (2005)

--- Slide 14 ---
The EMP and the Rise of Northwestern Europe?
The EMP did produce a “low pressure” demographic equilibrium. 
For example, in England c. 1700 illegitimacy was very low and most women married in their 20s.  
This reduced overall fertility. The population in 1700 was not much larger than it had been in 1300. 

--- Slide 15 ---
The EMP and the Rise of Northwestern Europe?
On the other hand, Dennison and Ogilvie (2014) note that the EMP could be repressive and that the intensity of the EMP was not associated with market development or better economic outcomes.
Other societies such as China and Japan also had means of controlling fertility. 
Palma, Reis, and Rodrigues (2022) show that women in Portugal married at a similar age as women in northern Europe and suggest that gender discrimination was not central to European divergence. 

--- Slide 16 ---
Demographic Change and the Transition to Modern Economic Growth
Demographic regimes can affect levels of per capita income. But as discussed in later chapters, sustained innovation is the key to modern growth.
Innovation is more likely to occur when a society can transmit knowledge of the past to future generations and is itself larger (Kremer, 1993; Henrich, 2004).
The transition from Malthusian stagnation to modern economic growth has been studied by Galor and co-authors (Galor and Weil, 2000; Galor, 2005, 2011).
Galor proposed a unified theory of the transition from Malthusian stagnation to sustained economic growth based on the interaction of demography and the incentive to invest in human capital. 
Unified growth theory accounts for two important developments: (1) the gradual increase in growth rates that occurred during the Industrial Revolution; and (2) the demographic transition of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
The demographic transition saw fertility rates plummet and ensured that as incomes rose, the rate of natural population increase declined. 

--- Slide 17 ---
Chapter Summary
Did having fewer babies contribute to the transition to modern economic growth?
In the Malthusian model, reductions in fertility can raise incomes (in equilibrium) whereas one-off improvements in technology have no impact on long-run living standards but simply result in a higher population. 
The Black Death killed 40-60% of the Europe’s population and brought about higher incomes and wages for several centuries. 
The EMP—a regime of higher age of first marriage—also strengthened after the Black Death, restraining fertility and according to some scholars laid the foundations for subsequent economic growth.
Demographic factors thus help to explain variations in per capita income prior to 1800, interacting with both cultural factors (such as kinship networks) and institutions (such as labor markets, inheritance regimes, and property rights systems). 
