
--- Slide 1 ---
HOW THE WORLD BECAME RICH
Chapter 2
Did Some Societies Win the Geographic Lottery?

--- Slide 2 ---
Geography and Economic Development
How does geography shape economic possibilities?
Jeffrey Sachs observed that many sub-Saharan African countries are landlocked. 
Given water-based transportation remains the most cost-effective way to transport goods, this places them at a major economic disadvantage.


--- Slide 3 ---
Geography and the Disease Environment

Geography also matters because it determines the disease environment. 
Malaria has probably killed more humans than any other disease in history. 
Countries in the malaria belt also grow more slowly.  According to some estimates by 1.3% per year in Africa (Gallup and Sachs, 2001).
Malaria may also have impeded historical development by reducing population density and delaying state formation.


--- Slide 4 ---
Geography and the Disease Environment


Another disease ecology is that of the tsetse fly.
The tsetse fly causes sleeping sickness. But it also impacts both economic development and political formation. 
Because the tsetse fly kills livestock, societies where the fly is active tended not to develop large-scale states (Alsan 2014)

Source: Alsan (2014)

--- Slide 5 ---
Geography and Guns, Germs, and Steel
Jared Diamond (1998) hypothesized that the shape of the continents determined the speed of technological diffusion. 
For example, agriculture was independently invented in both the Eastern and Western hemispheres. But it spread more quickly across Eurasia compared to in the Americas. 

--- Slide 6 ---
Geography and Guns, Germs, and Steel
Crops need similar climatic conditions to spread.
Diffusion was faster in Eurasia because climatic variation is less, allowing technologies to spread along a horizontal axis. 
The vertical axis of the Americas impeded the spread of domesticated crops.


--- Slide 7 ---
Evidence for Diamond’s Hypothesis
Pavlik and Young (2019) find that technologies moved more easily between east–west neighbors than between north–south neighbor

--- Slide 8 ---
The Power and Limitations of Geography Based Explanations
Power
Geography is usually exogenous.
This means that it is not influenced by other variables. This allows us to cleanly identify its impact on economic outcomes.   
Limitations
If geography is largely unchanging, then it cannot explain the timing of economic growth. 
Nor, as Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002) note, can geography explain reversals of fortune. 

--- Slide 9 ---
Geography & Climate 
While geographical characteristics are largely fixed, the climate can change. 
The Roman Empire arose during a period of exceptionally warm weather (Harper, 2017).
After 1000 CE, warmer weather similarly promoted higher agricultural yields and economic growth in Western Europe. 
Periods of colder weather generated negative economic shocks. 

--- Slide 10 ---
Geography & Climate 
After 1350 the European climate deteriorated. 
Colder weather was associated with slower city growth (Waldinger, 2019), more conflicts (Iyigun, Nunn and Qian, 2017), and the persecution of Jews (Anderson, Johnson, and Koyama 2017). 


--- Slide 11 ---
Geography and Transportation Infrastructure

Geography is largely fixed. But it can be adapted.
Investment in transportation infrastructure can reduce geographical barriers to trade. 
The Roman empire saw a huge investment in building a road network. 
This remained the basis of the European road network until the 19th century.

--- Slide 12 ---
A Transportation Reset?

Michaels and Rauch (2018) argue that the Romans originally build cities in Gaul and Britain for military purposes.
Their locations facilitated defense not trade. 
In the 5th century British towns were mostly abandoned while towns in Gaul remained settled.
As a consequence there was an urban reset in Britain but not in Gaul. 
Michaels and Rauch (2018) show that this allowed medieval English cities to be built in locations that were more favorable for transportation and trade (i.e., on rivers or coasts). 


--- Slide 13 ---
Smithian Growth

One reason why geography and transport infrastructure matter for growth was laid out by Adam Smith.  
Smith placed the division of labor at the center of his understanding of the economy.
The division of labor emerges because we can trade. 
Transportation infrastructure lowers the cost of trade and encourages the division of labor to become denser. 
Increased specialization leads to improvements in productivity.

--- Slide 14 ---
Smithian Economic Growth
The division of labor induces specialization, which in turn raises productivity.
Economic historians call economic growth based on trade, commercial development, and a deepening division of labor: Smithian growth. 
But Smithian economic growth can run into diminishing returns in the absence of sustained improvements in technology. 

--- Slide 15 ---
Geography and Transportation Infrastructure
Sustained or modern economic growth began during the British Industrial Revolution.
The periods before and during Industrial Revolution saw a massive improvement in transportation infrastructure. 
Canals, roads, and later rail knit together the British economy for the first time. 


--- Slide 16 ---
Railroads and Market Access in US Economic Growth

Transportation infrastructure was also critical to the remarkable economic rise of the United States after 1870 – during the Second Industrial Revolution. 
Particularly important was the railroad. Earlier work by Fogel (1964) downplayed the idea that the railroad was critical. 
Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) however take the Smithian insight seriously and show that the railroad had a dramatic impact of the size of the market that US producers could access. 

--- Slide 17 ---
Geography and the Price of Energy
Geography determines the location of natural resources. 
Countries like Kuwait and UAE are rich today largely due to oil.
During the Industrial Revolution, coal was the most important source of energy. 
Wrigley (1989, 2010) saw the transition from an organic economy to a mineral-based economy as critical to modern economic growth. 

Data source: Allen (2011); BTUs = British Thermal Units

--- Slide 18 ---
Geography and the Price of Energy

Kenneth Pomeranz (2000) argued that the convenient location of coal in the north of England (relatively close to the industrial centers) contrasted with the inaccessible location of coal deposits in China.
For him, this was a crucial factor in the “Great Divergence”.  
But why didn’t industry spring up in north China?  Also, not all locations close to coal deposits industrialized early. 

--- Slide 19 ---
Geography and the Price of Energy
Allen (2009) argued that cheap coal was important for the innovations of the Industrial Revolution (see Chapter 8). 
Mokyr (2009), however, contends that coal was not essential; other energy sources could have served as supplements.
Fernihough and O’Rourke (2020) find cities located close to coal deposits grew faster after 1750 (but not before). 
Coal on its own was unlikely to be decisive. But it availability as a cheap energy source did matter. 
The importance of coal (like oil) today was contingent on innovations that made use of them (especially the steam engine).  

Source: Fernihough and O’Rourke (2020)

--- Slide 20 ---
Chapter Summary
One can hardly deny the power of geography. Geographic features such as access to rivers and coasts, land quality, and the absence of specific disease ecologies help explain many patterns of comparative development. 
But geography does not provide a full answer to these puzzles. Before 1800, better-endowed lands weren’t richer in per capita terms than were less well-endowed lands. They just were more densely populated. 
Moreover, while geographic characteristics can explain much of the variation in the location of where the world first became rich, they do not provide the full story. 
Economies of scale and agglomeration effects rather than geographic fundamentals often explain why certain cities outperform others. 
Geography on its own cannot account for the timing of the Industrial Revolution, the onset of modern, sustained economic growth in the 19th century, or the various reversals of fortune that we observe in the historical record.
Where does this leave us? Is there a role for geography in explaining why the world became rich? 
