
--- Page 1 ---

--- Page 2 ---
Contents
Author’s Note
Introduction
Part 1:
 
Land: The Triumph of Gardening
Journey 1:
 
Tokyo to Niigata
Journey 2:
 
Negros Occidental
Part 2:
 
Manufacturing: The Victory of the Historians
Journey 3:
 
Seoul to Pohang and Ulsan
Journey 4:
 
Across Malaysia
Part 3:
 
Finance: The Merits of a Short Leash
Journey 5:
 
Jakarta
Part 4:
 
Where China Fits In
Epilogue:
 
Learning to Lie
Notes
Bibliography
Acknowledgements
Index
7
--- Page 3 ---
Part 2
M
anufacturing: The Victory of the Historians
‘If I had to summarise the essence of w
hat economic history can
contribute to economic science, I would say that there exist no “laws”
or rules in economics which are valid for all periods of history.’
Paul Bairoch,
 
Mythes et paradoxes de l’histoire économique
1
A
gricultural policy is important i
n poor countries because most
 
people are farmers, and
household farming can deliver big output and consumption boosts that can get an economy
moving briskly forwards.
 
However, a country cannot sustain growth on agriculture alone.
Returns from land reform and other agricultural improvements begin to taper off after only a
decade or so, and emerging economies have to transition into another phase of development.
That phase has historically revolved around manufacturing.
 
Today, even though the service
sectors have come to dominate the economies of rich countries, manufacturing remains
critical to the rapid economic transformation of poor countries.
There are two main reasons why this is the case.
 
The first is that manufacturing is based on
the use of machines, and so it allows poor countries to mitigate their biggest constraint at the
earliest stage of development – a shortfall of productive
 
human
 
skills.
 
In manufacturing, a
small number of entrepreneurs and technicians is able, through the medium of machines
(imported to begin with), to have an outsized impact on economic development by focusing
on mechanised production that employs large cohorts of unskilled and semi-skilled labour.
Workers can add value in basic manufacturing tasks after minimal training; they can then
learn more skills on the job.
 
Many service sector activities are not like this, because
productivity gains depend on educating and changing people before they can be productive.
 
A
person has to learn software code, for instance, before he or she can write even one line of
software.
 
Furthermore, it is less common for machines to ‘scale up’ what people do in service
jobs than in manufacturing.
 
This point becomes clear if you think of the difference between a
person overseeing a robotic production line in a factory, where the person’s work adds value
via himself
 
and
 
several machines, and a person who provides a service that has to be delivered
to each customer discretely, as when a telephone operator can speak to only one customer at a
time.
 
In short, productivity gains in services are inherently slower than in manufacturing
because there is greater dependence in the former on
 
people
 
and on e
nhancing human skills.
2
The second reason why manufacturing is so important is another relative advantage that i
t
has over the service sector.
 
This is that manufactures are much more freely traded in the world
than services.
 
Most manufactures can be put in containers and shipped to anyone willing to
pay for them.
 
Trade in services faces more practical and political impediments.
 
In practical
terms, some services – like call centres or software – are sold at distance down phone and
computer lines.
 
But most services require goods or people to travel in two directions, adding
time and cost.
 
It is not typically viable, for instance, to send bicycles to India for repairs, or to
fly heart-attack patients around the world before operating on them.
 
Politically, there are still
greater constraints on trade in services.
 
Genuine free trade in services would require free
movement of labour around the world, so that any service could be performed where it was
required.
 
However not even neo-liberal economists want to let labour migrate at will.
Evangelists of the free market do not really believe in free trade when it comes to unrestricted
64
--- Page 4 ---
movement of people, and nor do rich country governments.
 
Partly for this reason, in
international trade agreements trade in services is opened up more slowly than that in
manufactures.
 
Consequently, any country which bases its development policy on its service
sector faces higher barriers to exports than one with a traditional manufacturing-oriented
policy.
 
It should be no surprise that the
 
share of services in total world trade has been stuck at
around one-fifth for the past two decades.
3
Manufacturing
 
allows
 
for
 
trade,
 
and
 
trade
 
is
 
essential
 
to
 
rapid
 
economic
 
development.
Through
 
it,
 
poor
 
countries
 
learn
 
productive
 
skills
 
from
 
more
 
advanced
 
economies
 
and
 
acquire
new
 
technologies.
 
Non-trading
 
(‘autarkic’)
 
developing
 
states
 
such
 
as
 
the
 
former
 
Soviet
 
Union,
China
 
before
 
1978
 
and
 
India
 
before
 
1991
 
made
 
painfully
 
slow
 
technological
 
progress;
 
indeed,
so
 
much
 
so
 
that
 
their
 
populations
 
lost
 
faith
 
in
 
the
 
possibilities
 
of
 
economic
 
advancement
.
 
For
states
 
that
 
want
 
to
 
get
 
in
to
 
the
 
developmental
 
fast
 
lane,
 
the
 
global
 
market
 
in
 
manufactures
 
is
the
 
natural
 
conduit
 
for
 
a
 
quick
 
technological
 
learning
 
process.
 
Home
 
markets
 
are
 
important
because
 
local
 
firms
 
understand
 
their
 
local
 
customers
 
instinctively.
 
But
 
international
 
markets
and
 
international
 
trade
 
force
 
companies
 
to
 
shape
 
up
 
in
 
unique
 
ways,
 
adjusting
 
their
 
products
to
 
meet
 
different
 
demands
 
and
 
increasing
 
their
 
potential
 
aggregate
 
market
 
by
 
many
 
times.
Learning
 
about
 
manufactured
 
products
 
that
 
foreigners
 
like also paves the
 
way to more
demanding services exports at a later stage.
It is difficult for people in rich countries to recognise the importance of manufacturing in
development because in our economies services are now so dominant and manufacturing
employs so few people.
 
Most of us are also unaware that, because of the extraordinary
productivity gains that are possible in manufacturing, even the comparatively shrunken
manufacturing sectors in rich countries
 
today
 
produce more goods than ever.
 
In a
manufacturing laggard such as the United Kingdom, the real value of manufacturing output
 
is
currently
 
two and a half times what it was at the end of the Second World War.
 
This
expanded output is produced by less than one-tenth of the
 
British
 
workforce, compared with
the one-third of employees who worked in manufacturing as recently as 1960.
4
None the less, the productivity gains do not mean it is easy for a country like Britain to
further expand its manufacturing sector.
 
This is because many machine-based tasks are most
efficiently undertaken by the kind of
 
low-
skilled, cheap workers that rich countries are short
of.
 
And that is precisely where the opportunities lie for emerging nations.
 
Their
manufacturing is nothing like as efficient as it is in advanced economies, but nor does it need
to be because poor countries can throw highly motivated, cut-price, fresh-off-the-farm labour
at the task.
Caveat imperium
Manufacturing and trade drive the second phase of rapid economic development.
 
The
challenge to policymakers is therefore to direct entrepreneurial talent towards manufacturing
rather than services, and in particular towards large-scale manufacturing with the heft to
compete globally.
 
Manufacturing firms are nurtured by the state in two ways: through
protection and through subsidy.
 
These interventions create breathing space for entrepreneurs
while they learn to manufacture competitively.
Unfortunately, protection and subsidy also bring with them a well-known risk – one which
economists call ‘rent seeking’.
 
In a developing country, rent seeking refers to the propensity of
65
--- Page 5 ---
entrepreneurs to concentrate their efforts on obtaining protection and subsidies (rents) from
the state without delivering the technolo
gical progress and competitiveness that economic
development requires.
 
The problem is a very real one and has undermined industrial
development efforts in many poor countries.
 
The solution to the problem is to find
mechanisms that force manufacturing entrepreneurs to become globally competitive
 
at the
same time as
 
they are allowed to make profits for themselves.
 
In other words, the interests of
national development and business have to be forcibly aligned.
Governments in all the major economies of east Asia tried at some stage to
 
nurture domestic
manufacturers.
 
That those in north-east Asia succeeded, while those in south-east Asia failed
miserably, turned on a small number of policy differences.
 
By far the most important of these
was the presence – or absence – of what
 
I call
 
‘export discipline’.
 
This term refers to a policy of
continually testing and benchmarking domestic manufacturers that are given subsidies and
market protection by forcing them to export their goods and hence face global competition.
 
It
is their level of exports that reveal
s
 
whether they merit state support or not.
International sales have been the feedback mechanism by which successful governments
have known whether the manufacturing businesses they have nurtured are approaching global
standards
,
 
and
 
whether firms
 
have
 
invested
 
the billions of dollars it takes to create, for
instance, a viable steel maker or car firm efficiently.
 
Where export discipline has not been
present, development policy has become a game of charades, with local firms able to pretend
that they have been achieving world-class standards without having to prove it in the global
market place.
 
In south-east Asia, the energies of entrepreneurs were directed towards fooling
politicians rather than exporting.
 
In these circumstances, they demonstrated all the proverbial
finesse required to sell sand to Arabs or snow to Eskimos.
 
They also drained away nations’
developmental capital, redirecting much of it into excessive real estate development that
culminated in the property bubble
s
 
associated with the Asian financial crisis.
The capacity to export told politicians in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan what worked and
what didn’t and they responded accordingly.
 
Since exports
 
have
 
to pass through customs, they
were relatively easy to check up on.
 
In Japan, the amount of depreciation firms were allowed
to charge to their accounts – effectively, a tax break
 
– was determined by their exports.
 
In
Korea, firms had to report export performance to the government on a monthly basis, and the
numbers determined their access to bank credit.
 
In Taiwan, everything from cash subsidies to
preferential exchange rates was used to encourage exporters.
North-east Asian politicians then improved their industrial policy returns through a second
intervention – culling those firms which did not measure up.
 
This might have meant a forced
merger with a more successful firm, the withdrawal of capital by a state-directed financial
system, withholding – or threatening to withhold – production licences, or even the ultimate
capitalist sanction, bankruptcy.
 
Since the 1970s, there has been much talk about state
industrial policy in western countries being an attempt to ‘pick winners’ among firms,
something that most people would agree is extremely difficult.
 
But this term does not describe
what happened in successful developing states in east Asia.
5
 
In Japan, Korea, Taiwan and
China, the state did not so much pick winners as weed out losers.
Japan developed a government agency as early as the 1930s to ‘rationalise’ different
manufacturing sectors through mergers after studying German practice, and reintroduced a
66
--- Page 6 ---
similar agency after the Second World War.
6
 
The South Korean state was still more direct in
its disciplining of under
​
achi eving busi nesses.
 
Most of the top ten
 
chaebol
 
(conglomerates) of
the mid 1960s had disappeared through forced mergers and bankruptcy by the mid 1970s, and
half of the new group had disappeared by the early 1980s.
7
 
Few Koreans, let alone foreigners,
now know the names of some of the biggest
 
chaebol
 
of the post-war era, such as Samho,
Gaepong, Donglip, Shinjin and Dongmyung – and that is because they are long dead.
 
Another
group of huge firms, including Daewoo, Hanbo, Halla and Sammi, was culled by a process of
state negotiation and fiat during the Asian financial crisis.
 
In the car industry, half a dozen
auto makers were set up in Korea with the help of direct and indirect state subsidies in the
1970s and 1980s.
 
Over the next three decades, most of these firms were killed off.
 
Today only
one purely Korean car firm survives, Hyundai (with Kia as its subsidiary).
 
However, the last
company standing is the fastest-growing and one of the most successful car firms in the world.
The fact that north-east Asian governments concentrated on weeding out losers rather than
picking winners also helps to explain the existence of large businesses which grew up
 
without
significant direct state support and outside state plans – like Sony and Honda in Japan, or
Acer and HTC in Taiwan – in addition to ones which received more state largesse.
 
Businesses
that worked were always allowed to survive.
A third intervention in north-east Asia was to provide a great deal of bureaucratic support to
manufacturers which exported successfully.
 
In addition to domestic market protection and a
supply of credit, states provided important assistance in the field of technology acquisition.
Governments in Japan, Korea, Taiwan and China have variously undertaken collective
bargaining operations to buy foreign technology –
 
often forcing foreign firms to hand over
know-how or to lower their price for it in return for local market access – and organised
public sector or joint public
–
​
private research initi atives where individual  firms were unabl e to
undertake research and development investments alone.
 
One infamous intervention occurred
when Sahashi Shigeru, head of Japan’s Ministry of International Trade and Industry’s
Enterprises Bureau,
8
 
told IBM in the late 1950s that he would block Big Blue’s business
unless it licensed its technology to local firms at a maximum 5 per cent royalty.
 
He also
informed the US firm that it would have to accept ‘administrative guidance’ – a euphemism
for government instructions – as to how many computers it could sell in Japan each year.
Desperate for access to the burgeoning Japanese market, IBM agreed.
Such ruthless bureaucratic support of domestic manufacturing was aided in each state by the
concentration of key industrial and foreign trade policy decisions in a single government
agency: the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) in Japan; the Economic
Planning Board (EPB) in Korea; the Industrial Development Bureau (IDB) in Taiwan; and
the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) in China.
9
 
Considerable
attention has been paid to these bureaucracies over the years, in part because the most famous
and influential academic book about north-east Asian industrial development, Chalmers
Johnson’s
 
MITI and the Japanese Miracle,
 
is all about bureaucrats.
 
However, comparisons
with south-east Asia show that the significance of bureaucracies ultimately depends on the
more fundamental governmental decision to force entrepreneurs to manufacture for export
and then to cull firms which fail to perform adequately.
 
Bureaucracies are only as
 
good as the
policies they implement.
 
Above all, developing states must force their most powerful and
67
--- Page 7 ---
resourceful entrepreneurs to export, typically against their will.
 
Firms that can make money at
home in a protected environment are always reluctant to compete globally.
 
Other policies
tend to be induced by this basic framework.
 
That said, the framework was not rationalised in
east Asia by policy makers, but rather copied by nineteenth-century Japan from historical
example.
Unspeakable reality
To the modern economic ear, accustomed to ideas of free markets that are supposed to be
‘win–win’ for all participants, policies to protect local industry and create a forced march for
exports may sound more like a list of crimes.
 
In rich countries, we are raised to believe that all
wealth is the product of competition.
 
The shocking truth, however, is that every economically
successful society has been guilty, in its formative stages, of protectionism.
 
Outside of the
anomalous offshore port financial havens such as Hong Kong and Singapore, there are no
economies in the world that have developed to the first rank through policies of free trade.
10
It was Tudor Britain that pioneered protectionism and subsidies as a means to
industrialisation in the sixteenth century.
 
Government taxed exports of raw wool and imports
of clothing in order to nurture Britain’s export-oriented woollen textiles industry.
11
 
France
introduced similar strategies in the seventeenth century.
 
The independent United States
fought back the objections of southern plantation owners – who preferred to
 
export cash
crops and import manufactures – to pursue protectionist industrial policies and high tariffs
from the time of the Founding Father and first Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton until
the early twentieth century.
 
Indeed, the economic historian Paul Bairoch has dubbed the
United States ‘the mother country and bastion of modern protectionism’.
12
 
Prussia from the
time of Frederick the Great in the eighteenth century, and then the unified Germany refined
and expanded interventionist industrial policy in Europe.
 
In turn, German protectionism had
a profound influence on Meiji Japan.
The policies deployed by countries in Europe and north America when they were
industrialising included he
avy tariff and non-tariff restrictions on imports; controls on trading
rights (such as Britain’s Navigation Acts, which from 1651 allowed only British-flagged vessels
to trade in British and British colonial ports); special subsidies or ‘bounties’ for manufactured
exports and processed commodities; taxes and quantitative restrictions to discourage
unprocessed raw material exports; state infrastructure support for exporters through the
construction of canals and railways; state projects set up to obtain foreign technology (usually
by acquiring advanced machinery and wooing foreign technicians, often in contravention of
the laws of other nations); state provision of subsidised raw materials; and state export-quality
inspection regimes designed to build national brands and reputations for product reliability.
Overarching all of this, countries focused a lot of state support on small groups of large firms –
monopolies and oligopolies – which had the heft to make large capital investments and
compete internationally.
 
Examples range from Britain’s first chartered trade monopoly, the
East India Company, to Germany’s giant industrial cartels of the late nineteenth century.
In short, protectionism has always been the rich man’s entry ticket to industrial
development.
 
Historians enjoy considerable consensus on this point.
 
Most economists,
however, find it impossible to admit that protectionism could be a precondition of industrial
upgrading.
 
The problem is that protectionism involves another of the temporary trade-offs
68
--- Page 8 ---
that economics is at a loss to explain.
 
Measured by economists at a single moment in time,
protectionism is expensive and inefficient because it adds cost, punishes consumers and invites
retaliation.
 
However, as a means to the long-term end of industrial learning, protectionism
makes possible the acquisition of strategically vital knowledge at a cost that is only temporary.
The subsidies inherent in protection help shift the structure of an industrialising economy
from
 
a lower
 
level of value-adding to a higher one.
 
When the new level is reached, economists
still say that protectionism is inefficient because of its costs, but without conceding that it was
protectionism that changed the economy’s structure.
The learning role of state industrial policy and industrial protection has, over the centuries,
been reflected in the many child-rearing analogies that practitioners have used.
 
Alexander
Hamilton, who as Treasury Secretary was responsible for shaping the early m
anufacturing
policy of the independent United States, coined the expression ‘infant industry’ when setting
out his arguments in favour of protection.
 
The term was then picked up and widely employed
in nineteenth-century Germany.
 
The Meiji development theorist Sugi Kōji wrote of the need
for Japanese businesses to be ‘protected until they are mature, just as children are by their
parents and students by their teachers’.
13
 
Ha-Joon Chang, a contemporary Korean
economist, has argued that a developing country’s investment in industrial learning follows
exactly the same logic as parents’ investment in their children’s education.
 
Just as nineteenth-
century European parents who could legally send 10-year-old children to work in factories
avoided this if they could afford to, and kept their children in school until they were better
educated, so successful governments of developing countries have focused on learning and
higher future returns.
14
 
In manufacturing, the route to higher returns is through learning a
range of basic production techniques that have been digested by developed states throughout
the world.
 
The only exceptions to this have been offshore financial centres with very small and
mobile populations and a handful of super-specialised agricultural economies such as
Denmark, New Zealand and, up to a point, Australia, which have instead focused on
processing agricultural products (
which
 
is,
 
anyway,
 
another form of manufacturing).
The mechanism for acquiring manufacturing capability, like the means for acquiring all
practical skills, has always been ‘learning by doing’ – that is, making things again and again
until you make them well.
15
 
Like any kind of learning, it is somewhat hit and miss and
involves many disappointments.
 
But, just as we do not reject the idea of school if a child
frequently gets his or her homework wrong, so it is not the case that individual failures mean
that industrial learning is a flawed process.
 
Moreover, learning to manufacture things like
steel, petrochemicals, plastics, semiconductors and so on is like anything studied at school in
that others have gone before you and there is a curriculum.
 
Technology scholars refer to this as
working and learning ‘within the technological frontier’.
 
For at least a couple of decades,
developing states learn, modify and steal skills which have been established by others.
Throughout history, it has always been thus.
 
It is this learning around a set of established
ma
nufacturing skills which makes the role of governments and government policy important.
Governments can push firms and economies towards desired objectives precisely because
those objectives are established.
 
Later – as the present-day economies of countries from Japan
to Italy testify by their low growth and stagnant technological progress – too much, or the
wrong sort of, government interference becomes a problem.
 
However, this is a problem for
69
--- Page 9 ---
rich countries after they have used government policy to modernise quickly.
 
What we are
concerned with here is becoming rich in the first place – something that seems a whole lot
more important when you are poor.
What goes around …
The way to understand successful manufacturing policy in east Asia is to trace the manner in
which lessons learned by other countries were imported into the region.
 
North-east Asian
industrial policy was not invented out of thin air.
 
Instead it was copied from examples of
successful economic modernisation in the United States and Europe.
 
Most directly,
manufacturing policy was copied from the example of Germany, which in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries provided Meiji Japan with a contemporaneous case study of
successful industrialisation.
From Japan, ideas spread to the Japanese colonies of Korea and Taiwan, and also to China,
whose modern development started about two decades behind that of Japan.
16
 
However,
China’s leaders were also influenced by an eclectic mix of Russian industrialisation under
Lenin and Stalin and inter-war fascist Germany, which became a special adviser to Chiang
Kai-shek on industrial and military modernisation until Hitler abandoned the relationship in
favour of Japan in 1938.
 
The influence of communist socialism and national socialism,
combined with the first president Sun Yat-sen’s deep-rooted prejudices against private
industry, meant that there was a particularly heavy emphasis on the role of state companies in
both pre- and post-1949 China and Taiwan.
In south-east Asian states, cut off from the direct influence of Japanese industrialisation,
learning about developmental manufacturing policy had to wait until the post-colonial, post-
Second World War era, when a set of international agencies (notably the World Bank) was
created to assist newly independent countries.
 
These agencies offered up a new, ‘approved’ set
of ideas about what to do.
 
To begin with, the ideas were drawn from the historical
developmental experiences of already rich countries.
 
In time, however, more abstract
economic theory took over, predicated on a belief that all economies, irrespective of their
levels of development, are subject to similar rules.
 
This had less than salutary outcomes for
states which lost touch with the lessons of history and accepted instead the dictates of the
‘science’ of economics.
Japan goes German–American–British
In the nineteenth century, Meiji Japan’s leaders latched instinctively on to the German
example.
 
The Meiji Restoration of 1868 took place three years before the Prussian-led
unification of Germany – even if Japan’s level of development lagged.
 
The oligarchs who ruled
the new Japan were also a temperamental match for the Prussians who drove the
modernisation of Germany.
 
Both groups were politically conservative, both were committed
to industrialisation, and both were concerned by territorial security.
 
The Prussians sought
military security by drawing other German-speaking states into their orbit, and dreamed of
avenging past defeats and territorial losses to Napoleon Bonaparte.
17
 
Similarly, the samurai
warrior class launched its coup against the Tokugawa shogunate with the aim of stitching
together all of Japan’s
 
han
 
– its large, semi-feudal domains – in a unitary nation that would be
able to fight back against colonial encroachment.
 
The means to military security in both places
was economic development.
70
--- Page 10 ---
Nineteenth-century Germany was the first state to articulate clearly a set of conclusions
about development that had been reached by the Americans when they had split from the
British Empire.
 
The German view was put forward by the so-called Historical School, an
informal affiliation of intellectuals that was the dominant force in the political economy and
jurisprudence departments of German universities in the mid nineteenth century.
 
The group
held that the history of Britain showed that a successful developing state had to deploy
protectionist industrial policies in order to nurture its manufacturers.
 
The School rejected the
newly fashionable pro-free market theories associated with Adam Smith and David Ricardo as
inappropriate to Germany’s sta
ge of development.
 
Friedrich List, the group’s greatest
luminary, contended that the free market evangelism emanating from Britain was motivated
largely by opportunism based on the country’s global technological leadership.
 
In an attack on
the new profession of ‘economics’, he wrote:
Any nation which by means of protective duties and restrictions on navigation has raised
her manufacturing power and her navigation to such a degree of development that no
other nation can sustain free competition with her can do nothing wiser than to throw
away these ladders of her greatness, to preach to other nations the benefits of free trade,
and to declare in penitent tones that she has hitherto wandered in the paths of error, and
has now for the first time succeeded in discovering the truth.
18
List’s views on development had formed while he was living in the United States between
1825 and 1832, when he had studied the arguments for a protectionist industrial policy to
nurture ‘infant industries’ set out by Alexander Hamilton in his
 
Report on the Subject of
Manufactures
 
submitted to Congress in 1791.
 
From the early nineteenth century onwards,
many of the report’s recommendations – including selective high tariffs – were adopted in
America.
19
 
Hamilton, born to a Scottish father in the British West Indies, was a keen
observer of the extreme protectionism that had characterised Britain’s rise to global pre-
eminence – not least its policy of preventing colonies from competing with British
manufacturers.
20
Friedrich List always maintained that free trade should be a country’s ultimate goal.
 
But that
goal was only feasible after manufacturing capacities were first raised up through protection.
‘The system of protection,’ he wrote, ‘inasmuch as it forms the only means of placing those
nations which are far behind in civilisation on equal terms with the one predominating nation
[Britain], appears to be the most efficient means of furthering the final union of nations, and
hence also of promoting true freedom of trade.’
21
 
It was an historical argument based on
stages of economic development that challenged the universal claims of the economists – an
argument that has subsequently been proven beyond doubt by the experiences of east Asia.
 
On
his return to Germany, List
 
became the most influential political scientist of the nineteenth
century after Karl Marx.
 
He offered the non-communist solution to development.
 
What List
figured out in America, the Japanese then learned from List and his Historical School
colleagues.
The Japanese, moreover, were an extraordinarily attentive audience.
 
Most of the senior
leadership travelled to Europe and north America in the 1870s and 1880s.
 
The first Japanese
mission, departing in 1871, contained three serving ministers and was used to decide on an
71
--- Page 11 ---
initial group of industrial pilot projects.
22
 
Although England, France and the United States
were much visited, Germany was the favourite destination.
 
Ito Hirobumi, Japan’s first (and
multiple) prime minister, spent two months in Berlin in 1882, meeting the Iron Chancellor,
Otto von Bismarck.
 
Among the second generation of Meiji leaders, several studied in
Germany for periods of years.
 
Hirata Tosuke, Minister of Agriculture and Commerce and
then Interior Minister in the 1890s, was the first Japanese to obtain a German doctorate, in
1875; Hirata also undertook one of several translations of List into Japanese.
23
 
Kanai
Noboru, who studied in Germany in the 1880s under almost all the key scholars of the
Historical School, returned to a professorship at Tokyo Imperial University and trained a
generation of bureaucrats at what remains Japan’s most elite school for government officials.
Several important German scholars were also recruited to teach in Japan and to advise the
government.
The diaries and other papers of leading Japanese statesmen contain repeated references to
the suitability of Prussian ideas and institutions for their country.
 
The historian Kenneth Pyle
called the notion of copying the development trajectories of advanced states the ‘
idée fixe
’ of
Meiji development.
24
 
T
he economic historian Robert Wade noted that in the Japanese
language the concept was often communicated in the metaphor that all developing countries
and their economies are ultimately ‘descending the same stretch of the river’.
 
This was the
Historical School message writ large.
Beg, borrow, steal …
Meiji Japan began to implement its industrial policy in the 1870s just as Prussia had in the late
eighteenth c
entury, by opening a series of state pilot factories in basic industries.
 
Most of these
lost money but, as in Prussia, the government was prepared to subsidise an initial learning
process at a time when private investors were unwilling to risk their capital in poorly
understood businesses.
 
Just as the Prussians had bought and copied English machines and
convinced English engineers to work for them – despite British criminal laws which forbade
this – Japan re-engineered imported machinery and hired foreigners with essential technical
knowledge.
 
There were 400 foreigners at work in Japan within a decade of the Meiji
Restoration and this number rose to several thousand.
Britain abolished her last legal restraints on the export of manufacturing machinery in 1843,
and governments and town guilds in the rest of Europe began to lift similar restrictions, so the
global availability of technology was less constrained for Meiji Japan than it had been for
continental European states.
25
 
The Japanese were pressured into signing international patent
and copyright agreements, but they ignored them.
 
‘That [the agreements] posed no effective
obstacle to Japanese copying of foreign designs,’ wrote the Japan historian William Lockwood,
‘was a constant complaint of manufacturers abroad.’
26
 
As would be the case again and again
in rising states in post-Second World War east Asia, Meiji Japanese knock-offs were typically
low-cost, low-tech product adaptations which were mocked as cheap and tacky by foreigners.
In fact, they were usually goods evolved with Japan’s tight-fisted rural consumers in mind –
the key early market.
 
Less frequently, foreign technology was copied and cleverly upgraded, as
with the Toyoda automatic loom, which was sold back to the home of modern textiles,
Britain.
27
 
Like Prussia, Japan discouraged foreigners from making direct investments in its
72
--- Page 12 ---
economy.
In the 1880s, the Japanese government sold off most of its pilot firms – in businesses like
mining, cotton spinning, woollen thread production, silk reeling, shipbuilding, plate glass and
cement – to private entrepreneurs at low prices.
 
Subsequently, many of the ventures became
highly profitable.
28
 
In 1889, a modified Prussian constitution was promulgated in Japan
which put much of the business of actually running government in the hands of a professional
bureaucracy.
29
 
These bureaucrats then nurtured an early generation of entrepreneurs, not
only
 
through the sales of pilot factories, but also with licences to operate firms that faced
limited competition – oligopolies – and with minimum profit guarantees in mining, shipping
and infrastructure projects.
 
Builders of railways, for instance, were guaranteed a return of not
less than 7 per cent.
 
Mitsubishi, founded by a politically well-connected trader, Iwasaki
Yataro, in 1870, was given government vessels and huge subsidies until the firm was finally
able to break the foreign stranglehold on shipping.
 
Exports, which at the outset were mainly
raw silk and the simple manufactures of small-scale firms, began to take off from their low
base, rising eight times between 1880 and 1913.
… and scale up
In Germany, there had been little real industrial innovation until the final stages of the
country’s ascent to modernity, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
 
This
proved even more the case in Japan.
 
The Prussian, and then German, key to progress had been
to increase the scale of investments, often by merging firms, while making only incremental
modifications to old technologies.
 
The industrial techniques Germany employed during take-
off were mostly developed in England and France: the Gilchrist–Thomas system for
producing phosphorous-free pig iron, the commercial production technique for aniline
dyestuffs, and an assortment of technologies for electricity generation and transmission.
 
The
unprece
​
dented scale of Germany’s output meant that unit costs became l ower than t hose of
established industrial powers like Britain, whose earlier investments in smaller-scale plants
became a liability.
 
Germany’s economies of scale were such that its iron and steel works were
able to soak up the transportation costs of importing half their iron ore (at a time when per-
unit freight rates were far higher than they are today) and still remain Europe’s most efficient
producers.
 
It was a game of targeted industrial development in which Germany pushed total
annual investment in its economy to one quarter of GNI, a rate never seen before.
30
Only in the 1880s, after two decades of relying on raw silk as her main foreign currency
earner, was Japan ready to emulate Germany by building factories on a grand scale.
 
She began,
as has every significant developing economy, with textiles, a business with limited capital
requirements and ubiquitous markets.
 
In 1882, the legend
ary Meiji entrepreneur Shibusawa
Eiichi put a technician he had sent to Manchester to study cotton spinning together with a
consortium of financiers and opened a steam-powered mill with 10,500 spindles.
 
The capital
outlay was more than six times any investment in the Japanese cotton industry to date.
 
A year
after it commenced production, the factory paid out to its shareholders an 18 per cent
dividend.
 
Economies of scale had arrived in Japan and the country began to reduce its reliance
on imported cotton thread and cloth, which had accounted for one-third of all imports in the
late 1870s.
31
Shibusawa next convinced government to lift import duties on raw cotton and moved Japan
73
--- Page 13 ---
on to the German-style approach of scale processing of imported raw materials.
 
He saw that
scale producers ideally seek protection at home but also free access to the cheapest, highest-
quality raw materials on the world market.
 
The government sacrificed the interests of
previously protected Japanese cotton farmers to those of industry, and by 1914 various textiles
accounted for 60 per cent of all Japanese exports.
 
The country’s chronic trade deficits ended.
The First World War then disrupted European industrial output, allowing Japanese firms to
move in on colonial Asian markets for all kinds of basic goods: textiles, bicycles, canned foods,
and so on.
 
There was an unprecedented export boom.
 
(In European style, Japan also took
Taiwan, in 1895, and Korea, in 1910, as captive colony markets for itself.)
More export discipline needed
Despite Japanese success, however, there was a latent problem with the development model,
and one that Germany had also experienced.
 
This was that Japan’s biggest companies managed
to avoid doing much exporting, leaving it up to smaller firms.
 
The so-called
 
zaibatsu
 
family
conglomerates which came to dominate the Japanese economy in the inter-war years focused
on mining, shipping and infrastructure concessions and on upstream, domestic-oriented
manufacturing businesses, all of which allowed them to charge high prices to the rest of the
economy without having to bother with the export market.
 
The
 
zaibatsu
 
became huge – by
1928 the Big Four (Mitsui, Mitsubishi, S
umitomo, Yasuda) accounted for about 15 per cent
of all the paid-up capital in the Japanese economy
32
 
– but they frequently profited by putting
the squeeze on downstream manufacturers.
 
This meant that in the good times the
manufacturers survived on thin margins and lacked the cash flows to move on to more
complex activities; and when the bad times hit, they went bust.
With the onset of domestic recession in Japan in 1920, thousands of manufacturers started
to go out of business.
 
As the recession endured, government was eventually driven to discover
the final, essential modification to its industrialisation policy: a subsidy system that forced big
business to behave in the interests of national development, and to export.
 
The process of
discovery was a very gradual one that spanned the Second World War.
 
It was also a process
that Germany had gone through when that country descended the same stretch of the
economic river in the late nineteenth century.
Germany had hit its problems in the two-decade deflationary downturn that occurred in
Europe after a financial crisis in 1873.
 
The German economy was affected much like the
Japanese one in the 1920s, with thousands of smaller, downstream manufacturers driven to
bankruptcy.
 
Firms which survived often did so by creating production cartels which sought to
prevent price cutting.
 
However these cartels – and the mergers they encouraged as big firms
bought up small ones to capture production quotas that were set by cartel boards – only
exacerbated a long-run trend for the biggest, most upstream players in the economy to bilk
both downstream manufacturers and individual consumers.
The situation came to a head when a government inquiry into cartels was held in 1903,
covering some 400 groupings and 12,000 factories.
 
The inquiry roundly criticised raw
material producers for exploiting domestic manufacturers.
 
However, it recognised the need to
sell excess manufacturing output in overseas markets to keep production capacity in use and
Germans in jobs.
 
The solution suggested by the cartel groups was a rebate system that gave raw
material and component cost reductions only to production that was destined, directly or
indirectly, for export.
 
In effect this meant that German domestic prices – kept artificially high
74
--- Page 14 ---
by tariffs – subsidised the development of manufacturing export markets.
 
It marked the birth
of a series of cartel-managed
 
export subsidy regimes that triggered what the economic
historian Clive Trebilcock called ‘the exuberant German export drive of the 1900s’.
33
The first such cartel was put into force by the Steel Works Association in 1904.
34
 
Export
subsidies focused economic activity on capital-intensive manufacturing and helped propel
Germany to the highest rank of contemporary technological development.
 
Weaker members
of export cartels were forced to get rid of obsolete production machinery because the
international market was less forgiving of lower-quality production than the protected
domestic one.
 
This was export discipline at work.
 
German exporters scaled up further and
further to a point where they could fund radical technological innovations.
 
They opened up
and dominated entire new industries like electrical engineering, chemicals and petrochemicals
with vast investments in research and development.
35
Japan refined its industrial policy around the export discipline of large manufacturers over a
long period between 1925 and 1954.
 
The process spanned the Depression and the fascist, war
and early post-war eras.
36
 
It began in 1925, when the Japanese government created the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MCI) with legal authority to oversee the pricing and
quality of important exports.
37
 
Following a devastating banking crisis in 1927, the
Commerce and Industry Deliberation Council was set up to lead mergers of industrial firms
that were facing bankruptcy.
 
The term
 
sangyō gōrika
 
–
 
​
‘ i ndustrial rational isation’ – came  i nto
use to signify the need for the state to cull weaker industrial firms within the context of a
protectionist environment that nurtured industrial development.
38
 
In 1930 a senior MCI
official, Kishi Nobosuke, spent seven months in Germany studying how cartels operated
there.
 
In 1931, after Kishi published his report, a new law allowed for a cartel in any business
where two-thirds of entrants wanted one; it also provided the government with clear powers
to enforce cartel agreements.
39
 
By the mid 1930s cartels existed in twenty-six industries, from
iron and steel to silk thread.
 
However, as in Germany before the introduction of export
subsidies, these measures only tended to strengthen the great
 
zaibatsu
 
whose activities were
concentrated in upstream businesses, while downstream manufacturers remained under the
zaibatsu
 
kosh (albeit in an expanding economy in the 1930s as militarisation pumped up
economic growth).
40
 
Before the Second World War, the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry remained focused on protecting manufacturers from the
 
predations of the
 
zaibatsu
,
rather than imposing export discipline on the whole industrial structure.
The final pieces of Japan’s manufacturing policy puzzle had to wait until the arrival of the
Supreme Commander
 
for
 
the Allied Powers (SCAP), Douglas MacArthur, after the Second
World War.
 
It was the American-led government which dispossessed the
 
zaibatsu
 
families
(they had been too close to the military), banned their holding companies and instead
enhanced the powers of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
 
MITI was born out of the
MCI in 1949.
 
It obtained extraordinary controls over both industrial policy and trade policy
– powers intended only as temporary post-war measures by the SCAP – which allowed it to
combine export discipline with culling losers to a degree never before seen.
41
 
After Japan’s
independence was restored in 1952, and a somewhat timorous pro-American government led
75
--- Page 15 ---
by Yoshida Shigeru fell in 1954, MITI went to work.
The rest, as they say, is history.
 
MITI ran a protectionist pro-manufacturing policy built
around rigorous export discipline.
 
The big industrial firms of post-war Japan were beholden
not to
 
zaibatsu
 
bosses, but to MITI bureaucrats who focused them on exports by exempting
up to 80 per cent of their export revenues from taxation.
 
When Japan was forced under the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to stop tax exemption of export earnings
in 1964, MITI instead based firms’ depreciation allowances on export performance – an
equivalent tax rebate by a back door.
 
In the 1950s MITI officials, still working far inside the
global technological frontier, systematically researched and built the foundations of a world-
class manufacturing economy.
 
They moved year by year through steel, shipping, fertilisers,
synthetic textiles, plastics, petrochemicals, automobiles and electronics.
 
MITI’s Enterprises
Bureau licensed the acquisition of all foreign technology, involving 2,487 contracts between
1950 and
 
1963.
 
An Industrial Structure Council – an enhanced version of the 1927
Commerce and Industry Deliberation Council – was set up with forty-five committees to
oversee every major industry.
 
The bureaucrats who ran the committees hammered out
agreements with business leaders on export targets, quality control standards, productivity,
capacity changes and mergers.
42
 
Firms that did not co-operate with MITI found that they
had no foreign exchange allocation to buy raw materials and e
quipment.
 
Favoured
manufacturers were given not only subsidies and tax breaks but also publicly funded
infrastructure investment and free land.
43
 
Most business leaders loathed being told what to
do, but they had little choice but to co-operate.
All this represented the raising to a new level of the infant industry policies that had spread
from Britain to the independent United States to Prussia and the rest of continental Europe
in the nineteenth century.
 
Of course, impressive and effective refinements of state-led
industrial policy were seen in West Germany, France and Italy after the Second World War.
However, it was the aggressive application of infant industry techniques in a relatively poorer
country, Japan, that caught the world’s attention most forcefully.
 
From 1952 Japanese
manufacturing and mining output increased more than tenfold in only two decades.
 
Japan
became the first state to close in on sustained double-digit economic growth.
44
 
Many people
thought the country had discovered a new and unbeatable form of economic management.
(The US and Japanese bestseller
 
Japan as Number One
 
came out in 1979.) In fact Japan had
merely rediscovered old ideas, and built on earlier German refinements thereof.
 
Moreover,
while the Japanese capacity to burnish and improve those ideas was impressive, it was put in
the shade by South Korea and Taiwan.
 
Meiji Japan was a relatively powerful, stable state –
soon to be a colonial power – when it began implementing its industrialisation programme in
the nineteenth century.
 
Its two former colonies were small, repressed and, particularly in
South Korea’s case, dirt poor when they started out on their journeys in the early 1950s.
Historian and general
The means by which effective manufacturing policy came to South Korea was simple.
 
The
man who defined Korea’s modernisation era was General Park Chung Hee, who came to
power in a coup on 16 May 1961.
 
Park had served as a lieutenant in the Japanese colonial
military, in the elite Kwangtung army when it oversaw a huge industrialisation drive in Korea
and Chinese Manchuria in the 1930s.
 
Unlike European colonists, Japan belatedly built
76
--- Page 16 ---
manufacturing plants in its colonies and the result was an industrialisation example that post-
colonial leaderships could follow.
45
 
(In European and American colonies, there were no
medium- or heavy- industrial plants because all but the most basic industrial goods were
supplied from the home country.)
General Park therefore had Japanese ideas about how to run his country.
 
However, he was
also an amateur historian who specialised in the histories of rising powers.
 
He was well read on
German development, and followed closely that country’s swift, state-led re-industrialisation
after the Second World War.
 
He also knew in detail the stories of Sun Yat-sen, Turkey’s
Kemal Pasha and Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser and their efforts to nurture modern, large-scale
industries.
 
Nine months after taking power in Korea, the peasant-born Park published a book
of his own,
 
Our Nation’s Path: Ideology for Social Reconstruction
, which contained a road map
for what Park described as ‘co-ordination and supervisory guidance, by the state, of mammoth
economic strength’.
46
 
The next year Park published
 
The Country, the Revolution and I
, with
chapters on ‘The Miracle on the Rhine’ and ‘Various Forms of Revolution’ in which he
discussed different historical revolutions from an economic and developmental perspective.
(He always referred to his own coup as a revolution.) In both his books, in a reference to the
river that runs through Seoul, Park promised his countrymen a ‘miracle on the Han’.
Because Park had been a member of a communist cell in the South Korean army in the
1940s, South Korea’s American allies were nervous that he might still be a closet communist.
But he stressed that, as in Japan, the Korean state would do the planning while the private
sector would lead the investment: ‘The economic planning or long-range development
programme must not be allowed to stifle creativity or spontaneity of private enterprise,’ Park
wrote.
 
‘We should utilise to the maximum extent the merits usually introduced by the price
machinery of free competition, thus avoiding the possible damages accompanying a monopoly
system.
 
There can be and will be no economic planning for the sake of planning itself.’
 
He
gave as his historical cue the co-opting of private capitalism by the Meiji oligarchs:
‘Millionaires … were allowed to enter the central stage, both politically and economically, thus
encouraging national capitalism,’ he wrote.
 
‘The case of the Meiji imperial restoration will be
of great help to the performance of our own
 
revolution.’
47
Park knew his history and his books also show that he had a fine grasp of the basic economic
condition and resources of his country.
 
He was a very well informed peasant.
 
Like the Meiji
oligarchs in Japan in the 1930s, however, Park had not yet worked out the role of export
subsidies.
 
But he quickly discovered the power of these when, desperate for foreign exchange,
his regime created a textile cartel on the Japanese model, furnishing it with cheap loans, tax
exemptions and tariff exemptions on its raw materials.
48
 
Overseas sales increased and
precious foreign exchange started to flow in.
 
In 1962 Korea’s merchandise exports were worth
USD56 million; three years later they were worth over USD170 million.
49
 
Park was so happy
that he declared that from 1964 every 30 November would be Korea National Export Day.
He needed the hard currency to import equipment for the massive industrial investments he
planned.
 
‘Thereafter,’ the scholar Alice Amsden noted, ‘the Park regime increasingly made
exports a compulsion rather than a choice.’
50
 
Indeed, Korea became the most export-
dependent developmental state the world had seen, with the government giving subsidised
77
--- Page 17 ---
credit to any firm that sold abroad.
 
The interest rate paid by exporters ranged between a
quarter and a half of the rate paid by everybody else.
 
In the high-inflation 1970s, the real,
inflation-adjusted interest rate given to exporters was between –10 per cent and –20 per cent
per annum.
 
So long as they could raise their sale prices in line with inflation, exporters were
being paid to borrow money.
51
With merchandise exports rising around twentyfold in the 1960s to USD836 million in
1970,
 
Park doled out production licences and credit lines to entrepreneurs whose exports
impressed, giving them the opportunity to pursue his vast infrastructural and industrial
developments.
 
Many people have likened the
 
chaebol
 
business groups that were thus nurtured
– the biggest like Hyundai, Daewoo and Samsung each absorbed one-tenth of bank credit in
peak years – to Japan’s pre-war
 
zaibatsu
.
 
However, whereas the old
 
zaibatsu
 
were adept at
avoiding export obligations, Park’s
 
chaebol
 
were compelled to lead the export campaign.
 
Korea
thereby avoided the problem of export-shy big business that had for a long time constrained
both Japan and Germany.
 
The country went straight to a more effective form of infant
industry promotion.
Of course, it was not all Park’s doing.
 
He was ably assisted by other Koreans who had also
observed Japan’s pre-war industrialisation.
 
Among these was an important group that had
worked for the colonial Industrial Bank of Chosen,
52
 
led by Chang Ki-Yong, who headed the
Economic Planning Board.
 
Park gave the EPB powers which, like those of MITI in Japan,
straddled both trade and industry; its director’s political rank was that of vice prime minister.
In the 1970s the EPB set out a massive heavy and chemical industries (HCI) investment
programme.
 
Juicy subsidies, including cheap credit and land, were offered to entrepreneurs
who were prepared to build export-capable plants for petrochemicals, machine building, steel,
shipbuilding, electronics and non-ferrous metals.
 
Most professional economists said the HCI
plan was lunacy.
 
Even record-setting Japan had three-quarters of a century of industrial
experience behind it when it undertook its heavy industrial drive in the 1950s.
 
The World
Bank’s 1974 report on South Korea expressed ‘grave reservations about the practicability of
many of the export goals set for individual heavy industries’ and recommended the country
stick with textiles.
53
 
The warning looked prescient at the start of the 1980s when Korea was
saddled with extreme overcapacity in heavy industry.
 
Yet, even at the nadir, the firms that
Park backed were slowly breaking into export markets and in the mid-1980s boom in US and
European markets, Korea emerged as a global force in steel and shipbuilding, and later in
semiconductors and autos.
 
By 1987 the World Bank was writing that the vast, integrated
Korean steel plant, Pohang Iron and Steel (now known as POSCO), was ‘arguably the world’s
most efficient producer’;
54
 
the Bank had refused to finance the plant.
 
As of 1984, three-fifths
of Korean exports came from the heavy and chemical industries Park had demanded, versus
less than one-quarter at the start of the HCI drive in 1973.
Along the way, Korean bureaucrats were reading not the rising American stars of neo-liberal
economics, or even Adam Smith, but instead Friedrich List.
 
The Korea and Taiwan scholar
Robert Wade observed when he was teaching in Korea in the late 1970s that ‘whole shelves’ of
List’s books could be found in the university bookshops of Seoul.
 
When he moved to the
Massachussetts Insitute of Technology, Wade found that a solitary copy of List’s main work
78
--- Page 18 ---
had last been taken out of the library in 1966.
55
 
Such are the different economics appropriate
to
 
different stages of development.
 
In Korea, List’s ideas for a national system of development
were being adapted to a country with a population far smaller than Germany’s or Japan’s, and
with a mid-1970s GDP per capita on par with Guatemala.
56
 
The ideas were implemented in
the teeth of the worst international trading conditions for a generation featuring two
unprecedented energy crises.
 
It did not matter.
 
Park motored on regardless.
 
Each time the US,
the World Bank and the IMF urged him to back away from his state-led industrial policy he
agreed – and then did precisely nothing (or occasionally a very little).
57
 
Park was a leader of
conviction, and his convictions were based in history.
Public sector variants
China and Taiwan’s approaches to industrialisation differed from Japan and Korea’s because
of the different roles played in these economies by public ownership.
 
On the mainland after
1949, the Communist Party of China (CPC) nationalised everything.
 
In Taiwan, where the
defeated Kuomintang (KMT) party set itself up, a big role was also given to state ownership.
The reason was the common legacy of republican China from 1911 to 1949.
 
Sun Yat-sen’s
abiding antipathy to private ownership, the influence of Russia on the republican government
until 1927 (when Chiang Kai-shek split with Russian and Chinese communists) and the
subsequent influence of Germany and then German national socialism in the 1930s meant
that, before 1949, public ownership of industry in China was already the norm.
58
The vehicle for state ownership in China before 1949 was an industrial planning
bureaucracy that was far bigger, and more sophisticated, than
 
almost anyone, including
Chinese people
,
 
realise
s
.
 
From 1935, following earlier, smaller-scale experiments with
planning, industrial policy was directed by the now-forgotten National Resources
Commission (NRC).
 
Under Kuomintang leadership, the NRC became a huge planning
agency in the 1930s, responsible for strategic civilian and defence industries.
 
In 1936, it
implemented an ambitious barter deal with Nazi Germany that traded Chinese minerals for
German industrial technology; the arrangement only ended because of Hitler’s decision to
side with Japan after Japan launched an all-out war against China in 1937.
59
 
Under military
mobilisation against the Japanese, the NRC
 
continued to grow and to expand its control over
industry.
 
By 1944 it had 12,000 staff and 160,000 dependent workers in mining,
manufacturing and electricity generating enterprises.
 
Some businesses were set up as state
firms and others were nationalised from the private sector.
 
As of the Second World War,
almost seven-tenths of the paid-up capital of registered businesses in China belonged to state
firms, most of them managed by the NRC.
60
During the Second World War, the agency produced an enormously detailed, 20-volume
plan for the industrialisation of China once the conflict ended.
 
But with the resumption of
the Chinese civil war in 1946, and much less US aid than Chiang Kai-shek had hoped for, the
NRC’s grand ambitions were not realised.
 
The agency continued to expand, to a record head
count of 33,000 staff and nearly a quarter of a million workers in its enterprises by late 1947,
but it was unable to put most of its developmental plans into action.
 
NRC bureaucrats in
republican China had a reputation for relative competence and professionalism.
 
Most of them
stayed in communist China after 1949 and helped to hand over control of already state-run
79
--- Page 19 ---
companies to the CPC; many went on to work in Mao’s state planning apparatus.
 
The State
Planning Commission (SPC) was created in 1953 and implemented numerous projects that
had been conceived by the NRC – although personnel who had been employed under the
Kuomintang later suffered persecution in political campaigns.
 
The SPC is today called the
National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC).
A much smaller number of NRC staffers, most of whom had been posted to the NRC’s
Taiwan regional office when Japan gave up the island in 1945, went on to work there.
 
They
were allowed far greater influence than their peers on the mainland, and supplied a generation
of Taiwanese economic leadership – including eight of the fourteen ministers of economic
affairs prior to 1985, under whom the critical Industrial Development Bureau operated.
61
These were the senior officials who enacted a manufacturing policy that gave heavy preference
to public companies.
 
They created a Taiwanese state sector concentrated in the same
businesses that had been targeted by the NRC – petrochemicals, steel, shipbuilding, heavy
machinery and other types of engineering – and then they expanded the coverage.
 
Former
NRC employees also ran many of the state firms.
 
By the early 1980s, India and Burma were
the only countries
 
in contemporary non-communist Asia that had public sectors of
comparable scale.
62
Unlike Maoist China (or India or Burma), however, state ownership in Taiwan had limited
impact on growth and technological upgrading because government stressed the role of
exports in development.
 
It targeted specific sectors for export promotion from the early 1950s
(starting with processed foodstuffs
 
and then textiles
), allowed exporters to retain a share of the
foreign exchange they earned (all other foreign exchange had to be handed over to the central
bank), offered direct cash subsidies to exporters for a period, organised export cartels in order
to ‘manage’ competition, and introduced a limited amount of concessionary export credit
which, from 1957 to the mid 1970s, provided short-term export loans at rates around 50 per
cent cheaper than non-exporters paid.
63
 
In the 1970s, Taiwan pushed further into heavy
industry, into synthetic textiles and into the electronics sector for which it is today best
known.
 
The government set up the Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI) in 1973,
and the Electronic Research and Service Organisation (ERSO) in 1974, in order to license
foreign technology, undertake publicly funded research and development, and select public
and private firms to utilise the research and make new products.
 
Where Korea targeted mass-
production memory chips, Taiwan went after application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs),
which are developed with specific consumer electronic products in mind.
 
By the mid 1980s
ITRI and ERSO combined had well over 5,000 staff, as well as huge state-controlled
production subsidiaries.
64
That lurking problem
Export discipline in Taiwan was ostensibly highly effective.
 
In 1952, the value of Taiwan’s
exports was equivalent to only 9 per cent of GDP; by 1979, the figure was 50 per cent.
Through the 1970s exports grew so fast that one study found they accounted for almost 70
per cent of overall manufacturing expansion.
65
 
However, on close inspection Taiwan grew up
with an export economy that had some similar structural weaknesses to those of nineteenth-
century Germany and pre-Second World War Japan.
 
In 1985, it was small and medium-sized
80
--- Page 20 ---
enterprises with fewer than 300 employees which accounted for 65 per cent of exports, the
same ratio as in Japan in the 1920s.
 
Whereas the situ
ations in Germany and Japan were the
results of a failure to make big private firms export, in Taiwan there was a failure to impose
rigorous export discipline on big state firms.
 
It was a new twist to an old problem.
66
 
At the
same time, Taiwan also failed to support its exporting private entrepreneurs as effectively as
post-Second World War Japan and Korea.
For several decades, nobody paid much attention to Taiwan’s export structure.
 
The island
consistently boasted a higher GDP per capita than South Korea – USD8,000 in 1990 versus
USD6,300 for Korea.
 
Part of the differential is explained by the fact that Taiwan got moving
faster with its development in the 1950s, when Korean policy under Syngman Rhee was much
less focused.
 
It was also the case that Taiwan’s land reform was the most effective the world
has seen, and provided a strong boost to early manufacturing growth.
 
However, Taiwan’s
manufacturing policy was very much second best to Korea’s, and failed to impose adequate
export discipline on its biggest businesses.
 
This policy lapse eventually caught up with the
island’s economy.
 
In the 1990s, Korea closed its GDP per capita gap with Taiwan before being
temporarily knocked back by the Asian financial crisis.
 
Then it quickly caught up again, and
today boasts a USD2,000 GDP per capita lead over Taiwan.
67
Being state-owned was not the only reason why big Taiwanese state firms failed to become as
globally competitive as Korean
 
chaebol
.
 
(Public ownership is often associated with poor
performance, but it does not guarantee it.) Taiwanese state enterprises underperformed
Korean corporations because they faced less export discipline and less competition.
 
They were
allowed to be more dependent on foreign equity joint ventures for technology, and this
weakened their capacity to originate their own technology.
 
An example of the phenomenon is
the telecommunications sector, where local firms were unable to break their dependency on
US multinational partners ITT and GTE.
68
 
Meanwhile, Taiwan’s leading private companies,
like the computer manufacturer Acer, were denied the level of export subsidy, domestic
protection and financial support given to their Korean cousins, and so were forced to live off
thinner margins, consequently becoming less technologically competitive and smaller in
scale.
69
 
By the start of the 1980s, Korea already had ten firms in the
 
Fortune 500 list of
leading industrial companies; Taiwan had two.
70
 
Compared with Korean firms, Taiwan’s
exporters do more low-margin manufacturing as suppliers to American and European
multinationals – making, for instance, all of the world’s iPhones and iPads – and less higher-
margin manufacturing under their own brands, whereas Korea has Samsung selling its own
smart phones and leading the world by sales, and Hyundai among the top five global auto
makers.
71
 
Taiwan may be structurally ‘stuck’ one level below the branded, high-margin top
layer of economic activity where the richest countries exist.
The triumph of the historians
Despite the relative failings of industrial policy in Taiwan, it remains the case that Japan,
Korea and Taiwan are all examples of states that have successfully managed to develop their
manufacturing businesses.
 
Each of their governments exercised the minimum necessary level
of export discipline.
 
Korea and Taiwan went from being the world’s 33rd and 28th leading
exporters in 1965 to being the 13th and 10th respectively twenty years later.
 
At that point,
81
--- Page 21 ---
both economies boasted greater manufacturing exports than the whole of Latin America.
72
The heavy industrialisation drives pursued by Korea and Taiwan took the ratio of their light
to heavy manufacturing from 4:1 to 1:1 in only fifteen years.
Of course, manufacturing policy throughout north-east Asia was based on the solid
foundation of highly productive, expanding agricultural sectors.
 
Meiji Japan had developed
faster than early nineteenth-century Prussia or eighteenth-century Britain in large part
because its agricultural output had also increased faster, creating a domestic market for basic
manufactures which firms later exported.
 
In the 1950s, Japanese farm output increased by
another half in one decade, and once more a booming rural market demanded manufacturing
products which went on to become export staples.
73
 
Chalmers Johnson reckoned that in the
1950s and 1960s transistor radios and cameras were the only two important Japanese export
goods which had not first been honed in the domestic market.
74
 
In the same vein Korea and,
especially, Taiwan were able to build out manufacturing economies from their agricultural
sectors.
 
Each north-east Asian state bore out the truism set down by the Japanologists Kazushi
Ohkawa and Henry Rosovsky
 
when analysing the original Meiji lift-off: ‘If there had been no
increase in the output of the traditional economy, there could hardly have existed any
domestic market for the output of modern industry.’
75
At the industrial policy-making level, what stands out with the benefit of hindsight is that
there was almost no role played in Japan, Korea or Taiwan by economists.
 
Meiji Japan blazed
its trail by following the Prussian, and earlier American, model which rejected the modern
classical economics that began with Adam Smith and David Ricardo.
 
The framers of the Meiji
revolution were trained in Germany and at Tokyo University’s law school, which focused not
so much on law as on European-style public administration.
76
 
There was a strong prejudice
against the theoretical approach associated with modern economics, and in favour of practical
problem-solving.
 
Yoshino Shinji, vice minister of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in
the 1930s, said of Japan’s implementation of German industrial planning techniques that:
‘Concerning the idea of control, there are many complex explanations of it in terms of logical
principles, but all one really needs to understand it is common sense.’
77
 
Japan exalted the
educated generalist – its government bureaucracy distinguished between administrative
officers and technical officers, and the former always outranked the latter.
 
At the height of its
powers in the 1960s, MITI had just two employees with PhDs in economics among its senior
staff.
78
A similar disposition carried over into South Korea, where until at least the 1970s almost all
the senior leaders and bureaucrats,
 
including Park Chung Hee and planning chief Chang Ki-
yong, were Japanese trained.
 
The main difference was one of class: many senior personnel in
the 1960s and 1970s came, like Park himself, from peasant stock.
 
The Korea scholar Jung-en
Woo referred to them as ‘men of peasant origin … when they thought of capitalism, they
thought of a conspiracy of the rich’.
 
In Taiwan, the constructors of industrial policy were not
generalist administrators as in Japan, but engineers.
 
Almost all Taiwan’s ministers of
economic affairs, most of whom started out in the mainland’s National Resources
Commission, had engineering or other science degrees.
 
K.
 
Y.
 
Yin, who defined industrial
policy more than anyone and started out at the Industrial Development Bureau in the 1950s,
82
--- Page 22 ---
was an electrical e
ngineer.
 
The IDB did not employ any economists until 1981.
79
The most prominent economists in circulation in north-east Asia in the 1950s and 1960s
were the ones sent by the US government to try to ‘straighten out’ its new allies.
 
Among these
was Joseph Dodge, who was despatched to occupied Japan in 1949 to enforce fiscal
austerity.
80
 
His policies induced a deep, deflationary recession in the winter of 1949–50.
 
The
country only recovered with the onset of the Korean War from June 1950 and the
concomitant demand for war-related supplies.
 
In 1952, Japan regained its sovereignty and
MITI then followed its own, history-oriented instincts.
 
In South Korea in the 1950s and early
1960s, US-despatched economists demanded the privatisation of banks, increases in interest
rates and import liberalisation.
 
The banks were briefly privatised, but Park Chung Hee
renationalised them after his coup.
 
Under pressure, he gave some ground on interest rates and
import controls, but most changes were cosmetic and designed to get the Americans off his
back.
 
As exports picked up from the mid 1960s, Park’s regime became increasingly confident
in resisting the demands of free market economists.
81
It would be wrong, however, to think that only economists of a neo-classical stripe were
providing advice from Washington.
 
After the Second World War a historical view of
development was still contending with a rising neo-liberal one in the economics profession.
Just as Wolf Ladejinsky enjoyed a few post-war years of great influence over agricultural
policy, so a handful of historically literate advisers were being taken seriously in the US capital
on matters of industrial development.
 
The most important of these was Walt Rostow.
 
Like
Ladejinsky, Rostow was from an immigrant Russian family.
 
Unlike Ladejinsky, he wore his
anti-communist sentiments on his sleeve, meaning he prospered through the Cold War,
becoming a senior adviser to three successive presidents
:
 
Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson.
As an economic historian, Rostow brought a classic Listian perspective to Washington.
 
His
key work,
 
The Stages of Economic Growth
, is about how developing states all descend, as the
Japanese phrase has it, the same stretch of the economic river; Taiwan’s chief planner, K.
 
Y.
Yin, was among the book’s fans.
82
The US appetite for land reform in east Asia disappeared in the early 1950s with the
sidelining of Ladejinsky.
 
But Rostow and his supporters continued to press US governments
to accommodate the industrialisation of friendly states like Korea and Taiwan, and infant
industry manufacturing programmes were grudgingly tolerated.
 
Indeed, the US often paid for
such policies with its vast military and civilian aid budgets.
 
Non-repayable grants were cut
back in the late 1950s, but other money continued to flow through the US Development
Loan Fund, whose explicit Rostovian aim was to support the industrialisation of Cold War
allies.
 
The governments in Seoul and Taipei not only structured infant industry programmes
on the US buck, they made American consultants fit in with their objectives.
 
In Taiwan, for
example, the New York engineering firm J.
 
G.
 
White was used to screen scores of state sector
heavy industrial projects.
 
And US consultancy Arthur D.
 
Little was tasked with identifying
new manufacturing products to promote, while advising on tax breaks to subsidise exporters
(the latter a policy that would today be illegal under World Trade Organisation rules).
83
North-east Asian states, unlike south-east Asian ones, used money proferred by the US to
strengthen industrial policy.
 
At the same time, neo-classical economists in north-east Asia
83
--- Page 23 ---
were, as Robert Wade put it, ‘held at a distance so that their preoccupation with efficiency
criteria would not subvert the process of identifying industries and products for intensified
growth’.
84
 
When such economists did start to appear in positions of influence in Korea and
Taiwan in the 1980s, ‘efficiency’ issues were becoming more pressing – large firms brought
into being by the state were increasingly abusive of their oligopoly positions, and consumers
were growing
 
w
eary
 
of being on the wrong end of state industrial policy, with its high
domestic prices subsidising export competitiveness.
 
In Korea, economists ‘with their newly
minted US PhDs’, as Jung-En Woo disparagingly put it, wrought havoc with the financial
system in the 1980s, setting the stage for Korea’s 1998 financial meltdown.
85
 
However, their
entry on to the policy stage was becoming necessary at a time when Korea was
 
already
 
globally
competitive in a number of manufacturing sectors, and needed to deregulate to progress
further.
In south-east Asia, by contrast, the historian’s understanding of the development process
never got a look-in.
 
Newly independent countries fiddled around with industrial p
olicy, and
then moved precipitously to taking advice from efficiency-oriented economists.
 
Sometimes
these were local economists trained abroad – as with the so-called ‘Berkeley Mafia’ of five
leading advisers to Suharto in Indonesia, who had all studied at the University of
California.
86
 
More often, the economic advice came from the World Bank and the IMF,
which were ready with their free market prescriptions for development, despite the fact that
these prescriptions have never produced a successful industrial state.
 
In recent years it has
become fashionable to heap much of the blame for the developing world’s ills on the World
Bank and the IMF.
 
However, it is more constructive to digest the principal lesson of Meiji
Japan: that, hard as it may be, a developing state does not have to depend on the advice of
others.
 
It can take control of its own destiny, look out at the world with open eyes, and figure
out what really goes on.
 
As the fifth and final article of the Meiji Charter Oath, promulgated
at the new emperor’s enthronement in April 1868, read: ‘Knowledge shall be sought
throughout the world so as to strengthen the foundation of imperial rule.’
87
Off to Korea and Malaysia
In order to understand how industrial policy works close up, it is necessary to see how
different manufacturing sectors were managed in north-east Asian versus south-east Asian
countries.
 
One of the most interesting country comparisons is between Korea and Malaysia,
because under Mahathir Mohamad the latter made a unique political commitment within
south-east Asia to industrialisation based on north-east Asian experience.
 
Yet the outcome
was far from what was hoped for.
 
The reasons illuminate some of the most important lessons
about industrial policy.
 
Korea and Malaysia set out with not dissimilar domestic business
structures.
 
But they ended up completely different.
 
In Korea, effective policy changed the very
nature of the economy; in Malaysia, key features of its old colonial economy remained intact.
Korea’s industrial development experience is particularly instructive in north-east Asia
because it is fresher than Japan’s and, in terms of the export discipline applied to big firms,
purer
 
than Taiwan’s.
 
Whereas Japan after the Second World War built on its earlier
developmental gains, Korea rose through a far rawer developmental experience.
 
The country
started out after independence from Japan in 1945 with a tiny entrepreneurial class of
compradores who had acted as commercial go-betweens for the colonial power.
 
In the 1950s,
84
--- Page 24 ---
these men were allowed to buy state assets cheaply, and to acquire many monopoly
concessions, from Syngman Rhee’s government.
 
There was no concomitant pressure to
manufacture for export, and Korea remained dependent on American aid.
 
But after Park
Chung Hee’s 1961 coup, the new regime began to apply export discipline with a vengeance,
and to cull underperforming firms.
 
In place of a hotch-potch of domestic economy-oriented
businesses, Korea went on to produce a group of huge, manufacturing-based conglomerates
with brand names – typified by Hyundai and Samsung – that are known around the world.
Both types of company – pre- and post-Park – were family-run, but state industrial policy
completely changed how these firms behaved.
After Malaysia gained its independence from Britain in 1957, its economy exhibited
important structural similarities to that of Syngman Rhee’s Korea.
88
 
The old colonial
compradore class which operated between the British and the Malay sultans continued to
dominate private business, enjoyed an enlarged share of state concessions for new investments
like food processing plants, and faced minimal pressure to manufacture or export.
 
In the
1970s, the government used state entities to buy out various mining and plantation interests
still owned by British companies.
 
But there was no shift to an export manufacturing strategy
for domestic firms.
 
Instead, government invited foreign companies to set up export processing
operations in Malaysia.
 
Then, with the ascent to the premiership of Mahathir Mohamad in
1981, came a belated recognition that Malaysia had gone through twenty years of
independence without starting to build an industrial structure worthy of the name.
Mahathir announced a ‘Look East’ policy in which he said Malaysia would emulate the
manufacturing development programmes of north-east Asia.
 
He had taken a keen interest in
Japan and Korea as Minister for Trade and Industry, immediately before he became prime
minister.
 
It seemed for a moment that, just as Korea had learned from Japan which had
learned from Germany, so
 
Malaysia was going to learn the lessons of history, too.
 
Yet despite
sending thousands of Malaysians to Japan for training, and even taking his cabinet on a course
to learn Japanese tea-drinking etiquette, Mahathir failed to understand the most basic
prerequisites of infant industry policy: export discipline and sanctions for failure.
 
He tried to
make state-owned firms do more than they were capable of, and completely failed to discipline
Malaysia’s leading entrepreneurs, who socked away billions of dollars without making any
serious developmental contribution.
 
Mahathir’s 1980s adventure became a tragi-comedy in
which he told cabinet colleagues to read a wholly inappropriate book on economic
development, and substituted overwrought cultural theories for simple, structural
explanations of economic cause and effect.
 
Despite this, even Mahathir’s half-baked industrial
policy left Malaysia better off than a country like the Philippines, which did nothing effective
to enhance its manufacturing capacity.
 
Malaysia is a manufacturing failure, but it is a reminder
that it is better to fail trying than never to try at all.
Among the different industrial sectors that provide useful comparisons between developing
states, the most fundamental one is steel making.
 
Steel has been an important part of the early
industrialisation process of all rich states bar financial havens and low-population agricultural
specialists.
 
Steel was critical to the economic development of Britain, the United States,
Germany and other continental European states, as well as to each of the three north-east
Asian success stories.
 
It continues to be an essential input into all manufacturing economies.
The capability to make steel efficiently has, historically, signalled that a country will go on to
85
--- Page 25 ---
make other things efficiently – a sort of entry-level test for the economic big time.
 
Park Chung
Hee seemed to know this when he inscribed the Chinese characters
 
gangtie guo li
 
– ‘Iron and
Steel is National Strength’ – that hang on the wall at the headquarters of Pohang Iron and
Steel, Korea’s first big steel plant.
Success in steel making depends on scale, on organising a limited number of inputs, and on
constant incremental improvements to a core technology that has been the same for a very
long time.
 
This bureaucratic, organisational challenge means steel making can be tackled
under state ownership.
 
In Japan, Korea and Taiwan, governments initially owned steel plants,
in addition to deciding at a state policy level what products to make, which technology to buy
and how much
 
capital to commit.
 
The role of the private entrepreneur was usurped, but in
each case steel was produced extremely efficiently.
 
Japan and Korea eventually privatised their
steel makers; Taiwan never has.
 
Malaysia opted for the same combination of state direction of
strategy and public ownership as Taiwan.
 
Yet Malaysia’s efforts to deliver a public sector steel
champion came up very short.
In most businesses, the state is not cut out to replace entirely the private entrepreneur.
Other sectors involve a greater number of inputs and supplier relationships than steel, as well
as a much bigger marketing challenge.
 
Such is the case with car making, which Korea, Malaysia
and every major east Asian economy apart from the Philippines tried to break into.
 
The
marketing requirement in particular favours the talents and energy of the private entrepreneur
because of the need for flexibility and for swift responses to changing market tastes.
 
As a result,
the state’s most effective role is not to take over all aspects of entrepreneurial activity, but
rather to channel the private entrepreneur towards its developmental ends.
 
In particular, the
entrepreneur must be compelled to compete internationally in a business that is a cut-throat
and highly cyclical.
 
In Korea, government achieved this by attracting half a dozen hungry
businessmen with the subsidies, only to whittle them down over thirty years to a single, world-
beating Hyundai–Kia colossus.
 
The process was far from tidy – in fact, it was often chaotic –
but with the anchor of export discipline it was ultimately successful.
 
Malaysia, by contrast,
first tried to enter the car business with a single state-owned firm – so that it was impossible to
threaten to favour another entrant – and with no serious export discipline.
 
Then it added a
second public–private joint venture, focusing on a different segment of the market, again with
no real export discipline.
 
Malaysia’s most successful private entrepreneurs were not tapped for
the effort, and were instead allowed to carry on building their empires in non-manufacturing,
protected activities such as mobile telephony services or power generation.
 
Today Malaysia’s
car industry, like all its large-scale manufacturing industry, is a state sector headache, while its
private entrepreneurs exist in a parallel, non-manufacturing universe.
Korea and Malaysia point up the
 
single most important commonality of all developing states
in terms
 
of manufacturing policy: that in most large-scale businesses the critical
 
v
ariable is the
relationship between the state and private entrepreneurs.
 
A government can try to circumvent
the private sector by
 
running every firm itself.
 
But such an approach is not
 
recommended by
history.
 
Instead, governments must use their power –
 
particularly their discretion over state-
controlled assets, business licences, credit and
 
scarce foreign exchange – to make private
entrepreneurs do what
 
industrial development requires.
 
In so doing, governments need to take
a realistic view of entrepreneurs.
 
Rather than plead with them
 
to move voluntarily to some
higher moral plane, it is
 
better to accept the existence of the entrepreneur’s ‘animal spirits’,
89
86
--- Page 26 ---
and use his desire to make as much money as
 
possible to control him.
 
The entrepreneur seeks
to ‘get in
 
and grab’, as the term indicates.
 
The state has to
 
force him to fulfill developmental
objectives while this is going on.
Development is therefore a thoroughly political undertaking.
 
If governments allow
entrepreneurs access to what economists call ‘rents’ – sources of income at government
discretion – without contributing to developmental objectives, this is a political dereliction of
duty.
 
What south-east Asians were the first to call ‘crony capitalism’, whereby businessmen are
granted concessions without developmental strings attached, is a political failure rather than
an entrepreneurial one.
 
The term originates in the Philippines, where the political class has
been the most selfish and culpable among all the major states in east Asia.
 
Neo-liberal
economists argue that developing countries should avoid the risk of crony capitalism by
getting rid of economic rents.
 
But while this might make sense in rich countries, in aspiring
states it simply begs the question: How, in that case, will you get entrepreneurs to do what you
need them to do in order to develop your economy?
 
Were Park Chung Hee – who nurtured
world-beating entrepreneurs but never trusted them – still alive, his answer would quite
certainly be: You won’t.
 
Rents are the bait with which the successful developing state catches
and controls its entrepreneurs.
Journey 3: Seoul to Pohang and Ulsan
South Korea’s capital Seoul, like South K
orea generally, is a bit of a mess.
 
The city’s hilly setting
gives it a certain topographical charm.
 
But apart from some tidy bits around City Hall, the place
has the hallmarks of a job done cheaply, not that cheerfully and all too quickly.
 
In a very un-
Japanese fashion, people are prone to leave rubbish out on the street.
 
In the suburbs, the
monotonous high-rises look about right for the OECD country with the highest suicide rate.
 
The
food, however, is superb, and the taxis relatively cheaper than in Taiwan and Japan thanks to
Korea’s less than punctilious commitment to north-east Asian social equality.
90
The epicentre of Seoul is the top of a circle of which the bottom half is formed by a U-bend
in the Han river.
 
Here are City Hall, big business and the main public spaces.
 
It is around this
epicentre that three locations in the city quickly explain the nature of the relationship that was
formed in the 1960s between Park Chung Hee and the businessmen who industrialised
Korea.
 
The first location is the presidential residence, a couple of kilometres to the north of
the centre.
 
It was here that, in the wake of the May 1961 coup, Park made the 60-acre Blue
House compound his command post for Korean development; it has remained the centre of
government ever since.
 
Park abandoned the now-demolished, Japanese-built capitol for all but
ceremonial occasions and instead consolidated key offices of his regime in a modest battery of
low-rise satellite buildings around the blue-roofed – hence ‘Blue House’ – main pavilion.
There was an annexe for Park’s much-feared Korean Central Intelligence Agency (KCIA),
whose chief would in 1979 assassinate him, and offices for the powerful Blue House Economic
Secretariat.
Park kept his key people very close at hand; the main reason he needed to go out was for a
daily visit to the downtown Economic Planning Bureau, whose staff could not all be
accommodated at the Blue House.
 
The general’s modus operandi was reflected in words he
wrote in 1963: ‘We need wordless deeds and ambitious construction programmes.’
91
 
His
public explanation of what he was doing was his books.
 
The rest of the time he was getting on
87