
--- Page 1 ---

--- Page 2 ---

--- Page 3 ---

--- Page 4 ---

--- Page 5 ---

--- Page 6 ---
ple among the so-called aboriginal people (orang asli) of the Malay Peninsula and hill peoples in 
northern Thailand can recall their parents' and grandparents' stories about much-dreaded slave 
raids. 10
Provided that we keep in mind the various forms bondage can take over time, one is tempted 
to assert: "No slavery, no state." Moses Finley famously asked, "Was Greek Civilization based on 
Slave Labour?" and answered with a resounding and well-documented yes.11 Slaves represented 
a clear majority-perhaps as much as two-thirds-of Athenian society, and the institution was 
taken completely for granted; the issue of abolition never arose. As Aristotle held, some peoples, 
owing to a lack of rational faculties, are, by nature, slaves and are best used, as draft animals are, 
as tools. In Sparta, slaves represented an even larger portion of the population. The difference, to 
which we shall return later, was that while most slaves in Athens were war captives from non­
Greek-speaking peoples, Sparta's slaves were largely "helots," indigenous cultivators conquered 
in place by Sparta and made to work and produce communally for "free" Spartans. In this model 
the appropriation of an existing, sedentary grain complex by militarized state builders is far 
more explicit. 
Imperial Rome, a polity on a scale rivaled only by its easternmost contemporary, Han 
Dynasty China, turned much of the Mediterranean basin into a massive slave emporium. Every 
Roman military campaign was shadowed by slave merchants and ordinary soldiers who ex­
pected to become rich by selling or ransoming the captives they had taken personally. By one 
estimate, the Gallic Wars yielded nearly a million new slaves, while, in Augustinian Rome and 
Italy, slaves represented from one-quarter to one-third of the population. The ubiquity of slaves 
as a commodity was reflected in the fact that in tlhe classical world a "standardized" slave became 
a unit of measurement: in Athens at one point-the market fluctuated-a pair of working mules 
was worth three slaves. 
SLAVERY AND BONDAGE IN MESOPOTAMIA 
In the earlier, less documented, and smaller city polities of Mesopotamia the existence of slavery 
and other forms of bondage is beyond question. Finley assures us, "The pre-Greek world-the 
world of the Sumerians, Babylonians, Egyptians, and Assyrians ... -was, in a very profound 
sense, a world without free men, in the sense in which the west has come to understand the 
concept." ll What is very much in question, however, is the extent of slavery per se, the forms it 
took, and how central it was to the functioning of the polity.ll The general consensus has been 
Eco331: SKIP NEXT SECTION
--- Page 7 ---
Figure 12. Prisoners in neck fetters. Photo courtesy of the Iraq Museum, 
Baghdad, Dr. Ahmed Kamel 
A curious confirmation of the conditions of slave and enslaved debtors in Ur III comes from 
reading a utopian hymn "against the grain." Prior to the construction of a major temple (Eninnu) 
there was a ritual suspension of "ordinary" social relations in favor of a radical egalitarian mo­
ment. A poetic text describes what does not happen in this ritual of exception: 
The slave woman was an equal of her mistress 
The slave walked at his master's side 
The orphan was not delivered to the rich one 
The widow was not delivered to the powerful one 
The creditor did not enter one's house 
He [the ruler] undid the tongue of the whip and the goad 
Text of severla pages skipped
--- Page 8 ---

--- Page 9 ---

--- Page 10 ---

--- Page 11 ---

--- Page 12 ---

--- Page 13 ---

--- Page 14 ---
ECO331: Stop here