
--- Page 1 ---
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
SLAVERY AND THE BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Stephan Heblich
Stephen J. Redding
Hans-Joachim Voth
Working Paper 30451
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30451
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2022
The views expressed are those of the authors and should not be attributed to any institutions to 
which the authors are affiliated. We would like to thank Leah Boustan, Patrick Francois, Nathan 
Nunn, Elias Papaiannou, Raoul Sanchez de la Sierra, and Noam Yuchtman as well as seminar 
audiences at CEPR, Dartmouth, LACEA, NBER Summer Institute, Princeton, RIDGE, UBC 
Vancouver and Zurich for helpful feedback. Ellora Derenoncourt generously shared data and 
helpful comments. We are grateful  to the UK data archive for use of the “Integrated Census 
Microdata (I-CEM) Names and Addresses 1851-1911,” Study 7856. We also thank Bruce 
Campbell for kindly sharing the Lay Subsidy data.  Devin Bissky Dziadyk, James Godlonton, 
Stephanie Hu, Eugenia Menaguale, Haneul Jung, Lindsay Li, Joseph Sassoon, Maximilian 
Schwarz, Ewan Rawcliffe, Luca Vitale and Nan Xiang provided excellent  research assistance. 
Responsibility for any errors and omissions lies with the authors alone. Heblich acknowledges the 
support of the ORA Grant ES/V013602/1 (MAPHIS). The views expressed herein  are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic  
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official 
NBER publications.
© 2022 by Stephan Heblich, Stephen J. Redding, and Hans-Joachim Voth. All rights reserved. 
Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission 
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
--- Page 2 ---
Slavery and the British Industrial Revolution
Stephan Heblich, Stephen J. Redding, and Hans-Joachim Voth
NBER Working Paper No. 30451
September 2022
JEL No. F60,J15,N63
ABSTRACT
Did overseas slave-holding by Britons accelerate the Industrial Revolution? We provide theory 
and evidence on the contribution of slave wealth to Britain’s growth prior to 1835. We compare 
areas of
 Britain with high and low exposure to the colonial plantation economy, using granular 
data on  wealth from compensation records. Before the major expansion of slave holding from the 
1640s onwards, both types of area exhibited similar levels of economic activity. However, by the 
1830s, slavery wealth is strongly correlated with economic development – slave-holding areas are 
less agricultural, closer to cotton mills, and have higher property wealth. We rationalize these 
findings using a dynamic spatial  model, where slavery investment raises the return to capital 
accumulation, expanding production in capital-intensive sectors. To establish causality, we use 
arguably exogenous variation in slave mortality  on the passage from Africa to the Indies, driven 
by weather shocks. We show that weather shocks influenced the continued involvement of 
ancestors in the slave trade; weather-induced slave mortality  of slave-trading ancestors in each 
area is strongly predictive of slaveholding in 1833. Quantifying  our model using the observed 
data, we find that Britain would have been substantially poorer and more agricultural in the 
absence of overseas slave wealth. Overall, our findings are consistent with the view that slavery 
wealth accelerated Britain’s industrial revolution.
Stephan Heblich
Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy
University of Toronto  
1 Devonshire Place
Toronto, ON M5S 3K7
and NBER
stephan.heblich@utoronto.ca
Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics &
School of Public and International Affairs 
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
and also NBER
reddings@princeton.edu
Hans-Joachim Voth 
Department of Economics 
U of Zurich 
Schoeneberggasse 1 
CH-8001, Zurich 
Switzerland 
joachimvoth@gmail.com
--- Page 3 ---
1 Introduction
Europeans enslaved millions on the African continent during their colonization of the Ameri-
cas, consigning the survivors of transatlantic voyages to forced labor on sugar, tobacco, cotton
and coﬀee plantations in the Caribbean and North and South America. In the process, Euro-
peans accumulated wealth, either from the slave trade itself, plantation production, or the
wider triangular trade between Europe, Africa, and the Americas. To what extent did this
wealth contribute to the growth and economic development of modern Europe?
We provide new theory and evidence on this question for Britain’s Industrial Revolution.
We use granular data on the location of slaveholders within Britain collected under the terms
of the 1833 Abolition of Slavery Act. We combine these data on the spatial distribution of
slavery wealth with rich geographic information on economic activity in Britain before and
after its entry into transatlantic slavery in the 1560s. To identify causal eﬀects, we develop
an instrument for slavery wealth exploiting exogenous variation in slave mortality during the
middle passage, from Africa to the Americas: Where poor weather conditions led to longer
voyages, there were fewer survivors. By linking slave-traders to the locations of their an-
cestors, we show that higher mortality on voyages spelled lower slavery wealth in 1833. We
show that areas with exogenously more slavery wealth grow faster, experience more struc-
tural change, develop more mills and factories, and adopt more steam engines. We rationalize
these /f_indings using a dynamic spatial model, in which slavery wealth stimulates domestic
capital accumulation, and hence expands production in capital-intensive sectors.
A growing literature has documented slavery’s adverse eﬀects on African economic de-
velopment: African countries exposed to the slave trade are still markedly poorer today, with
lower levels of interpersonal trust (Nunn and Wantchekon 2011, Nunn 2008). While statues
commemorating slave traders and slaveholders continue to adorn European cities, and en-
dowed hospitals and libraries perpetuate their names, slavery’s economic consequences in
today’s developed countries are not well understood. The idea that slavery and the trade in
enslaved human beings jump-started the Industrial Revolution is not new: EricWilliams (1944)
famously argued that Britain accumulated vast wealth from the triangular trade – and that it
re-invested this wealth in the leading sectors of the Industrial Revolution.1 Indeed, no country
had greater involvement in the transatlantic slave trade than Britain, and it also industrialized
/f_irst. At the same time, quantitative economic historians have questioned the idea that the
slave trade boosted economic development in Europe, and in industrializing Britain in partic-
ular. Pro/f_its from the slave trade were no higher than in other lines of business, the argument
1Relatedly, historians of global capitalism (Wallerstein 2004,Frank 2011) have emphasized that Atlantic slav-
ery was crucial for economic development after 1500.
2
--- Page 4 ---
goes; absolute levels of pro/f_it from the slave trade were small relative to the size of the British
economy (Engerman 1972, Eltis and Engerman 2000).
We make a number of contributions to this debate. First, we emphasizeslaveholding in ad-
dition to slave trading. The purchase and sale of human beings was only one part of the slave
economy. Much of the wealth accumulated from slavery was derived from colonial sugar,
tobacco, cotton and coﬀee plantations. Participation in the slave trade often facilitated a tran-
sition to plantation ownership. Indeed, Solow (1993) argues that the pro/f_its from slaveholding
were an order of magnitude greater than direct pro/f_its from the slave trade itself.2 To measure
this wealth from slaveholding, we use a distinctive feature of our empirical setting: Britain,
through the Abolition of Slavery Act in 1833, provided compensation payments to existing
slaveholders. These compensation payments were substantial, equal to£20 million in current
prices, which was around 40 percent of the government’s budget and 5 percent of gross do-
mestic product (GDP), with the resulting debt not paid oﬀ until 2015. We use individual-level
data on these compensation payments to more than 25,000 slaveholders, as compiled by his-
torians over more than a decade in the Legacies of British Slavery database (Hall et al. 2014).
This allows us to directly measure slavery wealth for each slaveholder in terms of the total
number of enslaved persons and their assessed value.
Second, much of the existing debate about the Williams hypothesis has occurred at the
level of the economy as a whole. Since many factors change over time at the aggregate level,
this creates challenges for identi/f_ication and measurement. In contrast, we exploit geographi-
cal variation in slavery participation across locations within Britain, which enables us to con-
trol for these other aggregate time-varying factors. We combine our measure of slaveholder
wealth from the claims for compensation with detailed information on population, employ-
ment structure and property values across locations within Britain.
Third, a key challenge in the existing debate about the Williams hypothesis is that slavery
wealth is endogenous. To address this concern, we /f_irst use our spatially-disaggregated data
on economic activity before the rise of the slave economy, using property values in Britain
dating back to 1086. We use these data to check for balancedness and diﬀerences in pre-
trends between locations that subsequently have high or low slavery wealth. We also develop
a new instrumental variables estimation strategy based on the fact that many slave traders
eventually became slaveholders, investing their wealth in West Indian plantations. In the age
of sail, the idiosyncrasies of wind and weather heavily in/f_luenced the duration of transatlantic
voyages. Crowded and inhumane conditions on slave voyages led to high rates of mortality
2According to conventional estimates, pro/f_its from slavetrading amounted to around 0.5 percent of GDP.
In contrast, Solow (1993) estimates that pro/f_its fromslaveholding were around 5 percent of GDP, or roughly 80
percent of total domestic investment.
3
--- Page 5 ---
during the middle passage. A primary determinant of mortality for the enslaved was voyage
duration (Eltis 1984). As voyage times increased because of unfavorable winds, water began to
run out, and infectious diseases spread, raising mortality among the enslaved. High mortality
reduced slave traders’ pro/f_its, making their continued involvement in the trade less likely.
Hence, inclement weather shocks both directly reduced wealth, and also induced exit from
the slave trade, thereby reducing slaveholder wealth in 1833 (at the time of abolition). We
therefore instrument 1833 slavery wealth using a voyage outcome measure inversely related
to middle-passage mortality.
Fourth, we develop a dynamic spatial model to evaluate the aggregate and distributional
consequences of slaveholding. The model highlights three mechanisms through which slavery
wealth aﬀects economic development. First, for a given capital stock, greater access to colonial
slavery investments makes domestic investments less attractive through a standard substitu-
tion eﬀect, thereby decreasing the domestic capital stock. Second, greater access to colonial
slavery investments raises the productivity of the investment technology, which stimulates
capital accumulation and increases the steady-state domestic capital stock. Third, slavery in-
vestments are more collateralizefable than other investments, which alleviates collateral con-
straints, and again stimulates domestic capital accumulation. 3 We show that the net eﬀect of
these three forces is that locations with greater access to colonial slavery investments exhibit
faster capital accumulation along the transition path to steady-state and a higher steady-state
domestic capital stock. In the presence of /f_inancial frictions, this increased capital is dispro-
portionately invested locally, which in turn stimulates local economic growth, and structural
transformation towards capital-intensive manufacturing.
We use our voyage outcome instrument to identify the eﬀect of exogenous variation in
slavery wealth on local economic development. In our /f_irst-stage regression, we /f_ind that
a one standard deviation increase in this voyage outcome instrument (reduction in middle-
passage mortality) implies a 0.16 standard deviation increase in slaveholder wealth in 1833.
In our second-stage regression, we /f_ind that a one standard deviation increase in slaveholder
wealth translates into a 0.52 standard deviation increase in property values, a 0.61 standard
deviation increase in agricultural employment, a 0.87 standard deviation increase in manufac-
turing employment, a 0.79 standard deviation increase in the average number of cotton mills
in 1839, and a 1.78 standard deviation increase in the number of steam engines.
Combining our model and rich geographic data, we /f_ind substantial aggregate and distri-
butional consequences of access to slavery investments. At the aggregate level, we /f_ind an
3Of the twelve rules governing slavery in the West Indies in (Stephen 1824), rule X states “The slave may be
mortgaged, demised, and settled for any particular Estate or estates, in possession, remainder, or reversion. ” The
Legacies of British Slavery Database contains many examples of enslaved persons used as collateral.
4
--- Page 6 ---
increase in national income of 3.5 percent, which is sizeable relative to conventional estimates
of the welfare gains from international trade, such as the upper bound of 9 percent for 19th-
century Japan in Bernhofen and Brown (2005). Capitalists were the largest bene/f_iciaries with
an increase in their aggregate income of 11 percent, both because of the direct income from
slavery capital invested in colonial plantations, and because of the induced increase in steady-
state domestic manufacturing capital. Landowners experience small aggregate income losses
of just under 1 percent, because of the reallocation of labor away from agriculture. Expected
worker welfare rises by 3 percent, because of the substantial wage increases in slavehold-
ing locations, and the positive probability of living in those locations. At the disaggregated
level, we /f_ind that access to slavery investments played an important role in shaping the ge-
ography of the industrial revolution, consistent with our causal estimates using variation in
middle-passage mortality. The locations with the greatest levels of participation in slavery
investment experience increases in total income of more than 40 percent, with population in-
creasing by 6.5 percent, capitalists’ income rising by more than 100 percent, and landlords’
income declining by just over 7 percent.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section2 reviews the related literature.
Section 3 discusses the historical background. Section4 introduces our data. Section5 provides
motivating evidence on patterns of slaveholding and economic activity within Britain over
time. Section 6 develops the theoretical model that guides our empirical analysis. Section 7
reports our main empirical results. Section 8 summarizes our conclusions.
2 Related Literature
There is a large literature examining links between slavery and the Industrial Revolution in
Britain after 1750. The idea that riches derived from slavery accelerated economic develop-
ment is almost as old as capitalism itself – and so are the counterarguments. Adam Smith
considered slavery and the colonial system economically ineﬃcient. On the other hand, in
1788, when the British parliament debated the possible abolition of slavery, merchants in-
volved in the trade argued that “the eﬀects of this trade to Great Britain are bene/f_icial to an
in/f_inite Extent ... [and] ... were this [trade to be] abolished, it would [cause] very great Detri-
ment to our Manufacturers.... ” (Eltis and Engerman 2000). Karl Marx Marx (1867), in “Das
Kapital, ” famously opined that “the veiled slavery of the wage-workers in Europe needed, for
its pedestal, slavery pure and simple in the new world... ” In 1944, EricWilliams (1944) argued
“Britain was accumulating great wealth from the triangular trade. . . . that trade
inevitably [increased] ... the productive power of the country... the investment
of pro/f_its from the triangular trade in British industry ... supplied ... the huge
5
--- Page 7 ---
outlay for the construction of vast plants to meet the needs of the new productive
process... ”
Williams’ hypothesis stimulated a large body of academic research on links between the
triangular trade and industrial development in Britain. Historians of the ‘world system of cap-
italism’ in the vein of Immanuel Wallerstein and Gunder Frank have argued that economic
development in the European ‘core’ cannot be separated from exploitation and political sup-
pression in the periphery (Frank 1967, Wallerstein 2004), emphasizing the importance of cap-
ital accumulation. Using data on slave-trading voyages from British and European ports over
time, Derenoncourt (2019) estimates the contribution of the slave trade to city population
growth.4 Findlay (1990), for example, argues “slavery was an integral part of a complex ...
system of trade in goods and factors within which the Industrial Revolution ... emerged... [but
there is] no causal arrow from slavery to British industrialization. " Price and Whatley (2020)
estimate the /f_inancial impact of the South Sea Company’s monopoly on the trade of enslaved
Africans to Spanish America (the Asiento de Negros), as granted by the British Parliament.
While some studies focus on the pro/f_its from the slave trade, other historical research empha-
sizes the contribution of the wealth derived from colonial slavery plantations Darity (1990).5
Solow (1993) emphasizes that pro/f_its from slave trading and slave holding were large compared
with domestic investments in Britain.6
Critical assessments focus on the limited pro/f_itability of the slave trade. Some historians
have argued that planters in the West Indies barely covered their cost and that pro/f_itability
declined from the 1750s onwards (Ragatz 1928), but this notion has been disputed (Drescher
2010). Thomas and Bean calculated that Britain did not pro/f_it from slave plantations produc-
ing colonial produce (Thomas and Bean 1974). Similarly, Eltis and Engerman (2000) examine
aggregate eﬀects of the slave trade and conclude their analysis by saying, “African slavery ...
did not ... cause the British Industrial Revolution ... . "
Therefore, with a few exceptions, slavery has mainly been viewed as little more than a
sideshow in the transformation of Britain’s economy. However, there remains a scarcity of
4Related research by Acemoglu and co−authors emphasizes that, in North−Western Europe, Atlantic trade
led to better institutions by strengthening the hand of merchants (Acemoglu et al. 2005). However, these authors
do not emphasize that much of this trade derived from the traﬃcking of enslaved Africans.
5Using data from Maryland in the United States,González et al.(2017) provide empirical evidence that slavery
wealth was an important source of collateral used to /f_inance U.S. entrepreneurship. For the United States as a
whole, Francis (2021) emphasizes the role played by the tariﬀ revenue derived by the Federal Government from
the imports that were made possible by the export of the cotton produced by slave plantations.
6While not all scholars agree, there is substantial evidence that slavery did not accelerate development in
the U.S. (Bleakley and Rhode 2021, Wright 2006). A key diﬀerence is that slavery occurred domestically in the
U.S., which implies that three forces were at work: slavery’s eﬀect on capital returns, the local labor market, and
institutions and culture. Britain’s exposure to slavery was fundamentally diﬀerent, with nationals investing in
overseas slave plantations and the slave trade, but without any substantive domestic slavery.
6
--- Page 8 ---
quantitative, well−identi/f_ied evidence on the contribution of slavery towards Britain’s Indus-
trial Revolution, combining aggregate and cross-sectional evidence.
Our research is also related to the wider literature on structural transformation and eco-
nomic development, including Matsuyama (1992), Caselli and Coleman (2001), Lucas (2002),
Ngai and Pissarides (2007), Uy et al. (2012), Herrendorf et al. (2012), Bustos et al. (2016), Gollin
et al. (2016), Caprettini and Voth (2020) and Fajgelbaum and Redding (2022). We contribute to
research on the geography of the British Industrial Revolution (Crafts and Wolf 2014), and to
work on the role of /f_inancial development in economic growth generally, as well as during the
British Industrial Revolution in particular, including Gerschenkron (1962), Guiso et al. (2004),
Moll (2014), Itskhoki and Moll (2019), and Heblich and Trew (2019). Our main contribution
relative to this research is to provide theory and evidence on the role of slavery wealth in
in/f_luencing structural transformation and regional economic development.
3 Historical Background
Britain’s involvement in the slave trade dates back to the 1560s and expanded substantially
after 1640. In 1660, the Royal African Company was granted a monopoly over English trade
with the West Coast of Africa, including the slave trade. However, following the Glorious
Revolution of 1688 and the accession of William III, this monopoly was broken up; subsequent
slave voyages were /f_inanced and organized by individual ship owners.
By the 1700s, the ‘triangular trade’ from Europe-Africa-Americas was the mainstay of the
British West Coast ports of Bristol and Liverpool. This trade involved the export of manufac-
turing goods, including textiles, from Britain to the West Coast of Africa; the transportation of
enslaved persons from the West Coast of Africa to the Americas; and the export of plantation
products such as sugar, tobacco, coﬀee and cotton from the Americas to Britain.
Figure 1 shows the annual number of enslaved persons transported across the Atlantic by
ships from British ports (solid line) and ships from all nations (dashed line). From 1701-1807,
British ships are estimated to have have carried over 2.5 million enslaved persons, more than
one third of the over 6 million total transported during this period.7 The British slave trade was
concentrated in three British ports: Liverpool (49 percent); London (29 percent); and Bristol
(21 percent); with all other ports accounting for only 1 percent of trade.
The wealth accumulated from the slave trade and slaveholding was far from evenly dis-
tributed within Britain. James Penny, who was heavily involved in the slave trade, predicted
instant ruin from its abolition for the British towns most involved in it: “[s]hould this trade be
abolished, it would not only aﬀect the Commercial Interest . . . of the County of Lancaster, and
7The total number of enslaved persons embarked, including years after 1807, was 10.6 million (Eltis 1984).
7
--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: Slave Trade - Annual Total of Enslaved Persons Shipped, British vs ROW
Note: Annual total number of enslaved persons transported across the Atlantic ocean using ships from British
ports and ships from all nations.
more particularly the Town of Liverpool, whose fall, . . . would be as rapid as its Rise has been
astounding. ” (Eltis and Engerman 2000).
At the individual level, the sums involved were large. The Grade I-listed Harewood House
is one of England’s /f_inest country houses, and is still owned by the Lascelles family, who
amassed substantial wealth through slavery. In 1833, the Second Earl of Harewood received
£26, 307 in slavery compensation payments for 1,277 enslaved persons, which equals £19
million adjusted for in/f_lation, or£128 million when expressed as the same share of GDP.8
Over time, reports of barbaric conditions on slave ships led to a campaign for the abolition
of the slave trade.9 In response to this growing campaign, the Abolition of the Slave Trade Act
was passed in 1807, which prohibited the slave trade (but not slavery) in the British Empire.
Some abolitionists hoped that slavery would be unsustainable without the slave trade, but
further legislation was delayed by the Revolutionary Wars. Eventually, the Slavery Abolition
Act of 1833 was passed, making the ownership of enslaved persons illegal within the British
Empire (Taylor 2020).
Under the terms of the 1833 Act, the British government spent£20 million to compensate
slaveholders, equivalent to 40 percent of government revenue or 5 percent of GDP (Barro
8The grandfather of the Earl of Harewood was Edwin Lascelles, born in Barbados without a title in 1712. A
relative, Alan Lascelles, is The Queen’s private secretary in Net/f_lix’s series The Crown.
9Black African writers played an important role in making these barbaric conditions more widely known,
including Equiano (1789). For further discussion of the abolitionist campaigns, see Taylor (2020) .
8
--- Page 10 ---
1987). Additionally, formerly-enslaved persons were forced to work without remuneration for
up to six years under an “apprenticeship” system. Slaveholders were required under the 1833
Act to register claims for the number of enslaved persons held, which were systematically
collected and processed by a Slave Compensation Committee. Separate schedules were drawn
up for each colony that speci/f_ied a compensation rate per slave that depended on age and
occupation.10 Compensation was paid to slaveholders from 1835 onwards.
4 Data
We construct a new spatially-disaggregated dataset on slaveholding and economic activity
in England and Wales. 11 We combine seven main data sources: (i) Individual-level data on
slaveholding based on compensation claims paid under the 1833 Abolition of Slavery Act; (ii)
Individual slave-trading voyages from British ports; (iii) Population and employment struc-
ture; (iv) Property valuations; (v) Location of cotton mills; (vi) Family linkages; (vii) Steam
engines.12
Slaveholding We use data from the Legacies of British Slavery Database to measure the
geographical distribution of slavery wealth within Britain at the time of the abolition of slavery
in 1833. Starting with the records of the Slave Compensation Committee, this database was
constructed over more than a decade by the Centre for the Study of the Legacies of British
Slavery at University College London. The data include detailed information on compensation
claims, the identity of the awardees, the legitimacy of their claims, and the ownership records
of awardees. We use a digital version of these data, which includes information on 53,000
individuals connected to slavery, of whom 25,000 were awarded compensation for 425,000
enslaved persons. In Section G.1 of the online appendix, we provide an example of the entry
from this database for the Second Earl of Harewood. We observe name, date of birth and
death, biographical information including family history, address, the name and location of
each colonial plantation, and the compensation awarded and number of enslaved persons for
each plantation. We /f_ind a tight and approximately log linear relationship across slaveholders
between the value of slavery compensation paid and the number of enslaved persons claimed.13
We use the number of enslaved persons claimed for compensation purposes as our baseline
measure of slaveholding in our regression analysis.
10See Figure G.3 in Online Appendix G.1 for an example of such a compensation schedule.
11We focus on England and Wales, because the population census is reported separately for these two countries;
our historical property valuation data is unavailable for Scotland; and the Act of Union with Scotland occurs later
in 1707 after the start of slave trading from the British Isles.
12See Online Appendix G for further details about the data sources and de/f_initions.
13See Figure G.4 in Online Appendix G.1 for a binscatter of this relationship.
9
--- Page 11 ---
Slave voyages We use the slave voyages dataset constructed by Herbert Klein and collabo-
rators.14 This database contains information on 36,000 slave voyages, with a total of over 10
million enslaved persons shipped across the Atlantic from 1526 onward. Of these, 10,785 voy-
ages were conducted by British owners, involving the transportation of 2.9 million enslaved
persons from 1562 to the Abolition of the Slave Trade in 1807. For each voyage, we know the
names of (up to) eight owners; the port of origin; the ports visited on the African coast; and
the /f_inal destination. For a subset of voyages, we also observe the duration of the voyage, and
the number of enslaved embarked and disembarked. We use this information to compute a
voyage mortality rate, which we use to construct one of our instruments for slaveholding.
Population and Employment Structure We obtain data on parish population from 1801-
1831 from the population census (see Wrigley 2011). We supplement these population census
data with information from the History database of the Global Environment (Hyde) for years
before 1801 (see Klein Goldewijk et al. 2017). Data on employment structure by parish in 1831
are provided by Southall et al. (2004). We distinguish employment in agriculture, as well as in
manufacturing.
Cotton Mills We construct two sets of data on the location of cotton mills within England
and Wales. First, we digitized data on the number of cotton mills in each parish for the year
1839, as reported in House of Commons (1839). This parliamentary report summarizes the
results of factory inspections under the Factory Act and contains the most comprehensive data
on industrial establishments in Britain before the start of the Census of Production during the
20th century. Second, we digitized data on the location of 212 British cotton mills that were
erected in the early decades of the industrial revolution from 1768-88 from Colquhoun, as
revised and extended by Chapman (1981).
Property Valuations We use a number of diﬀerent sources of data on property valuations
for each parish. For the year 1086, we construct the value of land, buildings and equipment
for each parish from the Domesday Book, using the digitized data for each manor in PASE
(2010). For the year 1334, we use the value of personal property (excluding land and buildings)
for each parish from the Lay subsidies, as compiled by Glasscock (1974) and Campbell and
Bartley (2006). For the year 1798, we digitized the data on the land tax quotas for each parish,
as reported in House of Commons (1844). These land tax quotas were originally speci/f_ied in
1690, and were subject to gradual amendment over time (Ginter 1992). In 1798, these land tax
quotas were made unalterable by law; they remained unchanged until abolished in 1963. For
the years 1815, 1843 and 1881, we digitized rateable values for each parish, which correspond
14Available online at www.slavevoyages.org.
10
--- Page 12 ---
to the market value of the annual /f_low of rent for the use of land and buildings. With a few
minor exceptions, these rateable values include all categories of land and property, and were
used to raise revenue for local public goods.
Family Linkages We link the location of slaveholders in 1833 to that of slave traders’ an-
cestors. We use the fact that many individuals involved in the slave trade either returned to
their ancestral home areas, or continued to have family there (who would inherit, or bene/f_it
from their relative’s expertise). We begin by using the Slave Voyages database (see above) to
identify individuals involved in the slave trade. We next use two diﬀerent approaches to link
these slave traders to the locations of slaveholders in 1833. Our /f_irst approach uses genealog-
ical information. For each slave trader, we /f_ind the largest family tree containing this person
from Ancestry.com. From this family tree, we extract the universe of the slave trader’s
parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents (as far as these are available), and locate them
geographically based on birth address (or death address if birth address is unavailable). Our
second approach uses the geographical distribution of surnames in Britain (e.g.,Cheshire and
Longley 2011). We assign slave traders to locations probabilistically, based on the likelihood
of observing their surname in a location in the individual-level 1851 population census. We
use these two diﬀerent approaches to construct our two instruments for slavery wealth, as
discussed below.
Steam Engines We use the British Newspaper Archive to collect data on the location of
steam engines. We search for second-hand sales, advertisements, and job ads that contain ref-
erences to steam engines from 520 local newspapers in England and Wales. Over the period
1755–1850, we obtain around 20,000 references to steam engines, which we assign geograph-
ically based on the location of publication of the newspaper.
Data Structure To overcome changes in the boundaries of administrative units such as
parishes over time, we construct a hexagonal spatial grid over England and Wales, consist-
ing of 849 cells (“regions”). 15 Each grid cell covers an area of 200 square kilometers and the
distance from the centroid to the vertex measures around 9 km. Since the dominant mode of
commuting during our sample period was walking, 9 km is a reasonable maximum distance
over which it would be possible to walk to work. A further advantage of this grid cell struc-
ture is that it is straightforward to examine the robustness of our results to alternative sizes
of grid cells, as discussed below. We assign our data to grid cells either based on exact geolo-
cated addresses (e.g., for slaveholder addresses) or the latitude and longitude coordinates of
15We choose hexagons (rather than squares or triangles) because of their advantages for partitions of geo-
graphical space, as discussed for example in Carr and Pickle (2010).
11
--- Page 13 ---
the centroids of parishes (e.g., for our population census data). With around 10,000 parishes
in England Wales, each parish is small relative to the area of our 849 grid cells.
5 Motivating Evidence
We begin by providing some motivating evidence on patterns of slaveholding and economic
activity in England and Wales. In Subsection 5.1, we examine cross-section patterns at the time
of the Abolition of Slavery in 1833. In Subsection 5.2, we use our historical data on property
values to the examine the evolution of this relationship over time.
5.1 Economic Activity and Slaveholding in the 1830s
In Figure 2a, we show the spatial distribution of slaveholder compensation in 1833 in England
and Wales. To provide as /f_ine a level of spatial resolution as possible, we display slavery wealth
in this /f_igure at the parish level. The size of the blue circles is proportional to the amount
of slavery compensation awarded in current price 1833 pounds sterling. We /f_ind the largest
concentrations in the areas surrounding the three ports most heavily involved in the slave
trade and the products of the slave economy (in particular, sugar, tobacco, coﬀee and cotton):
Liverpool in the North-West, Bristol in the South-West, and London in the South-East. But
slaveholding extends throughout much of England and Wales, particularly in coastal regions,
and in the main population centers.
In Figure 2b, we show the manufacturing employment share in each of our hexagonal
regions in 1831. By that time, the manufacturing employment share for England and Wales
as a whole was approximately 42%, and we see the emergence of industrial agglomerations in
the North. However, agriculture still employs approximately 27% of the population and there
is substantial heterogeneity in agricultural specialization across regions, with agriculture still
accounting for more than 60% percent of employment in some counties. 16 Comparing the
two /f_igures, manufacturing employment shares and slaveholder compensation are positively
correlated.
In Figure 3, we provide further evidence on the correlation between structural transfor-
mation and slaveholding using three diﬀerent indicators: the agricultural employment share
in 1831 (left panel), the number of cotton mills in 1839 (middle panel), and the industry em-
ployment share in 1831 (right panel). We show the /f_itted values and 95 percent con/f_idence
intervals from local polynomial regressions of all three measures on the number of enslaved
16See Figure B.1 in Online Appendix B for a corresponding map of agricultural employment shares. To derive
the 1831 /f_igure, we linearly interpolate theBroadberry et al. (2010) employment shares for 1801 and 1851. Along
similar lines, Crafts (1985) reports a share of male employment in industry later, in 1840, of 47.3%.
12
--- Page 14 ---
Figure 2: Slaveholding and Structural Transformation in the 1830s
(a) Slaveholder Compensation in 1833
 (b) Manufacturing Employment Share in 1831
Note: Left panel : Slaveholder compensation in each parish in 1833 pounds sterling; size of blue circles propor-
tional to the total value of slaveholder compensation in each region. The largest three slave trading ports by
enslaved persons embarked are labelled. Right panel : Manufacturing employment share in each region in the
1831 census; darker blue colors correspond to higher values; lighter green colors correspond to lower values.
persons claimed in 1833. We /f_ind that areas with greater slaveholding have lower agricultural
employment shares, more cotton mills, and higher manufacturing employment shares.
5.2 Economic Activity and Slaveholding over Time
We next use our long historical time-series on property valuations to examine the timing
of the emergence of this relationship. We estimate non-parametric regressions of property
valuations per land area in each year on the number of enslaved persons claimed in 1833. We
control for other potential determinants of property valuations, such as geographical location,
using the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theorem. In particular, we regress both property valuations
and slaveholding on controls for latitude, longitude, and population, generate the residuals,
and then estimate our non-parametric regressions using these residuals. We /f_ind a similar
pattern of results in robustness tests without these controls.
13
--- Page 15 ---
Figure 3: Structural Transformation and Slaveholding in the 1830s
Note: In all three panels, horizontal axis shows total number of enslaved in each hexagon in 1833; vertical axes
show agricultural employment share in 1831 (left panel), number of cotton mills in 1839 (middle panel), and
manufacturing employment share in 1831 (right panel); dark line shows /f_itted values from local polynomial
regression; gray shading shows 95 percent con/f_idence intervals. Slave claims and the number of cotton mills are
inverse hyperbolic sine transformed.
Figure 4: Property Valuations by Year and Number of enslaved persons Claimed in 1833
Note: Local polynomial regressions; vertical axis is residual from regressing the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of
property valuation on the parish centroid’s latitude, longitude and population in each grid cell; horizontal axis
is residual from regressing the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of 1833 slavery compensation on the same control
variables; gray shading shows 95 percent con/f_idence intervals for 1881; see Section4 above and Section G of the
Online Appendix for further details about the property valuation data for each year.
14
--- Page 16 ---
In Figure 4, we show the estimated gradient between the inverse hyperbolic sines of each of
our measures of property valuation per land area and the number of enslaved persons claimed
in 1833. The residual property valuation and slaveholding variables both have mean zero.
For 1086 (solid medium black line), we /f_ind a relatively /f_lat relationship with only a slight
upward slope. For 1334, we again observe a /f_lat relationship, with essentially no gradient.
Therefore, we /f_ind no evidence of a relationship between levels of economic activity and future
slaveholding before Britain’s large-scale involvement in slavery from the 1640s onwards.
In contrast, using our 1798 property valuation data, which are based on amended 1690
land tax quotas, we begin to observe a positive upward-sloping relationship. By 1843, this
positive slope steepens further, particularly at higher levels of slaveholding. By 1881, there is a
further steepening of this positive slope, which is again greater at higher levels of slaveholding.
Hence, following Britain’s large-scale participation in slave trading and slaveholding from the
1640s onwards, we start to observe a positive relationship between economic activity and our
measure of slaveholding.
Taken together, these empirical /f_indings are suggestive of a relationship between slavery
wealth and economic development. In the next section, we develop a theoretical model to
understand the potential mechanisms for such an empirical relationship. In the following sec-
tion, we introduce our identi/f_ication strategy to estimate causal eﬀects, and use our theoretical
model to quantify the aggregate and distributional consequences of slavery investments.
6 Theoretical Model
To guide our empirical analysis, we develop a simple theoretical model of economic devel-
opment and structural transformation. 17 We augment a conventional speci/f_ic-factors model
to incorporate labor mobility, endogenous capital accumulation, and slavery investments in
an overseas colony. Slavery and domestic investments are assumed to be imperfect substi-
tutes for one another. Investments are subject to /f_inancial frictions, such that most domestic
investments occur locally. Access to slavery investments raises the rate of return to capital
accumulation, which increases the steady-state capital stock, and hence leads to an expansion
in the local capital-intensive manufacturing sector.
6.1 Model Setup
We consider a set of small open economies: many domestic locations indexed by i,n ∈
{1,...,N } and a colonial plantation N. Time is discrete and indexed byt.
17For a more detailed exposition of the model and the derivation of all theoretical results in this section of the
paper, see Online Appendix C.
15
--- Page 17 ---
The world economy includes four types of agents: workers, capitalists, landlords and en-
slaved persons. Workers, capitalists and landlords are located in the domestic economy. En-
slaved persons work in the colonial plantation. There are three sectors of economic activity:
agriculture and manufacturing (produced in the domestic economy) and plantation products
(produced in the colony). Agriculture is produced with labor and land. Manufacturing is pro-
duced with labor and capital. Workers are mobile between the two domestic sectors. But
land and capital are speci/f_ic factors that can only be used in agriculture and manufacturing
respectively. Enslaved persons and capital produce plantation goods.18
Workers are endowed with one unit of labor that is supplied inelastically. They are geo-
graphically mobile across locations within the domestic economy, but geographically immo-
bile between the domestic economy and the colonial plantation. Landlords in each domestic
location are geographically immobile and own local land (mn).
Capitalists are geographically immobile and own local capital (knt). Each period, they al-
locate capital to either local manufacturing or to plantation production. They also make a
dynamic consumption-investment decision. They can either invest their assets (a nt) in capi-
tal (knt) or a consumption bond that pays a constant rate of return ρ. Investments in capital
are subject to collateral constraints, such that capitalists can only invest a multiple of their
current assets: knt≤ λnant. If they invest in capital, they observe idiosyncratic productivity
draws for the number of eﬀective units of capital for use in domestic manufacturing and the
colonial plantation. These idiosyncratic productivity draws give rise to a downward-sloping
Keynesian marginal eﬃciency of capital schedule for each location. They also imply an asset
demand system in which the elasticity of substitution between domestic and colonial invest-
ments is determined by the dispersion of these idiosyncratic productivity draws. Capitalists
face /f_inancial frictions, such thatφnit≥ 1 units of capital must be invested from locationn in
order for one unit to be available for production in locationi∈{n, N}.19
6.2 Preferences and Endowments
The indirect utility function for a workerϑ in locationn at timet (unt(ϑ)) depends on the wage
(wL
nt), the consumption goods price index (p nt), amenities that are common across workers
(Bnt), and an idiosyncratic amenity draw (b nt(ϑ)) that captures all the idiosyncratic reasons
18For simplicity, we abstract from land use in plantation products and capital use in agriculture, although both
can be introduced. What matters is that plantation products and domestic manufacturing both use capital, and
domestic manufacturing is more capital-intensive than domestic agriculture.
19In our baseline speci/f_ication, we capture the local nature of investment by assuming for simplicity that
capitalists can only invest in their own location or the colonial plantation. In Online Appendix F, we develop
an extension, in which capitalists can invest in any domestic location subject to /f_inancial frictions that increase
with distance, which gives rise to a gravity equation in bilateral investment /f_lows.
16
--- Page 18 ---
why an individual worker can choose to live in a particular location:
unt(ϑ) = lnBnt + lnwL
nt− lnpnt +κ lnbnt(ϑ), (1)
where the parameterκ regulates the heterogeneity in idiosyncratic amenities. The consump-
tion goods price index (pnt) depends on the price of agriculture (pA
nt), the price of manufactur-
ing (pM
nt) and the price of plantation products (pS
nt):
pnt =
[(
pA
nt/βA
t
)1−σ
+
(
pM
nt/βM
t
)1−σ
+
(
pS
nt/βS
t
)1−σ] 1
1−σ
, (2)
where (βA
t ,βM
t ,βS
t ) are taste parameters that control the relative weight of the three goods
in utility; we assume inelastic demand between the three sectors (0 < σ < 1), as in the
macroeconomics literature on structural transformation.
Each location is connected to world markets through iceberg trade costs that can diﬀer
across sectors (τA
it ≥ 1,τM
it ≥ 1,τS
it≥ 1) and faces exogenous prices for each good on world
markets (pAW
t ,pMW
t ,pSW
t ).20 Therefore, no-arbitrage implies that the local prices of the three
goods (pA
nt,pM
nt,pS
nt), and hence the local consumption price index (p nt), are pinned down by
these iceberg trade costs and exogenous world market prices.
6.3 Technology
Each good is produced under conditions of perfect competition using constant returns to scale
Cobb-Douglas technologies. Cost minimization and zero pro/f_its imply that price equals unit
costs if a good is produced:
pA
it = 1
zA
it
(qit)αA (
wL
it
)1−αA
, i ∈{ 1,...,N }. (3)
pM
it = 1
zM
it
(rit)αM (
wL
it
)1−αM
, i ∈{ 1,...,N }. (4)
pS
Nt = 1
zS
Nt
(rNt)αS (
wS
Nt
)1−αS
, (5)
wherezj
it denotes productivity for sectorj∈{A,M,S};qit is the domestic agricultural land
rent;rit is the domestic rental rate per eﬀective unit of capital;rNt is the exogenous rental rate
per eﬀective unit of capital in the colonial plantation; wS
Nt is the exogenous shadow cost of
enslaved labor in the colonial plantation; and 0<α A,αM,αS < 1.
The equilibrium wage (wL
it) is determined by the equality of labor’s value marginal prod-
uct in agriculture and manufacturing for each domestic location where both these goods are
20While our baseline speci/f_ication assumes for simplicity that locations are small open economies that face
exogenous world market prices, we can also allow for an endogenous terms of trade.
17
--- Page 19 ---
produced. Given prices (p A
i , pM
i ), productivity (z A
i , zM
i ), land supply (mi), capital allocated
to domestic manufacturing (kM
it ) and total employment (ℓit) for a given location i, the model
behaves as in the conventional speci/f_ic-factors model. In contrast to this conventional frame-
work, both the capital allocated to domestic manufacturing kM
it ) and total employment (ℓ it)
are endogenous, and the capital stock (kit) is determined by consumption-saving decisions.
6.4 Labor Market Clearing
After observing her idiosyncratic amenity draws (bn(ϑ)), each worker chooses her preferred
domestic location. We make the conventional assumption that idiosyncratic amenities are
drawn from an extreme value distribution: F (b) = exp (− exp (−b−
γ)), where γ is the
Euler-Mascheroni constant. Using this assumption, the share of workers who choose to live
in locationn depends on relative amenity-adjusted real wages, and takes the logit form:
µnt = ℓnt
ℓt
=
(
BntwL
nt/pnt
)1/κ
∑N
k=1 (BktwL
kt/pkt)
1/κ, (6)
where ¯ℓt is total domestic employment, such that labor market clearing implies∑
i∈Nℓit = ¯ℓt.
Worker expected utility taking into account the idiosyncratic productivity draws is:
Ut =κ log
[ N∑
k=1
(
BktwL
kt/pkt
)1/κ
]
, (7)
Intuitively, expected utility increases in amenities (Bnt) and wages (wL
nt), and decreases in the
consumption price index (pnt).
6.5 Capital Allocation Within Periods
At the beginning of periodt, the capitalists in locationn inherit an existing stock of capitalknt,
and decide where to allocate this existing capital, and how much to consume and invest. Once
these decisions have been made, production and consumption occur. At the end of period t,
new capital is created from the investment decisions made at the beginning of the period, and
the depreciation of existing capital occurs. In the remainder of this subsection, we characterize
capital allocation decisions at the beginning of periodt. In the next subsection, we characterize
optimal consumption-investment decisions.
We assume that capital can be allocated either locally (k nnt) or to the colonial plantation
(knNt).21 The productivity of capital in each of these uses is subject to idiosyncratic productiv-
21In Online Appendix F, we develop our theoretical extension to allow capitalists to invest in all domestic
locations, subject to /f_inancial frictions that generate a gravity equation for investment. Using data from the
Legacies of British Slavery database, we /f_ind that capital investments indeed decline sharply with distance, with
more than 50 percent of investment occurring within 100 km, as shown in Online Appendix B.5.
18
--- Page 20 ---
ity draws (ϵnnt,ϵnNt) for eﬀective units of capital, as in Liu et al. (2022). These idiosyncratic
productivity draws correspond to Keynesian marginal eﬃciency of capital shocks, and give
rise to imperfect substitutability between domestic and colonial investments. 22 The return to
a capitalist from locationn of investing a unit of capital in destinationi (vnit) depends on the
rental rate per eﬀective unit (r it), the number of eﬀective units (ϵ nit) and /f_inancial frictions
(φnit): vnit = ϵnitrit/φnit. We assume that these idiosyncratic productivity shocks (ϵ nit) are
drawn independently from a Fréchet distribution: F (ϵ) = e−ϵ−θ
. The shape parameter θ >1
controls the dispersion of these shocks. We normalize the scale parameter to one, because it
enters the model isomorphically to /f_inancial frictions (φnit).
Using the properties of this Fréchet distribution, the shares of capital allocated to each
location depend on relative rental rates (rit) and /f_inancial frictions (φnit):
ξnit = knit
knt
= (rit/φnit)θ
∑
m∈{n,N} (rmt/φnmt)θ, i ∈{n, N}. (8)
Both local domestic manufacturing and the colonial plantation face an upward-sloping
supply function for capital, such that each must oﬀer a higher rental rate (rit) in order to attract
a larger share of capital (ξ nit). If some domestic locations n have better information about
slavery investments, for example through ancestral links to the slave trade, this is re/f_lected
in lower /f_inancial frictions for colonial investment (lowerφnNt), and hence a higher share of
capital invested in the colony N (higherξnNt).
Capital market clearing implies that the capital employed local manufacturing (kM
nt ) equals
the capital allocated locally (knnt). Similarly, the capital employed in the colonial plantation
(kS
Nt) equals the capital allocated there from all domestic locationsn∈N:
kM
nt =knnt =ξnntknt, k S
Nt =
N∑
n=1
knNt =
N∑
n=1
ξnNtknt, (9)
whereξnnt +ξnNt = 1. As an investment location i attracts a larger share of capital from an
ownership locationn (ξnit), it attracts units of capital with lower realizations for idiosyncratic
productivity, and hence moves further down its marginal eﬃciency of capital schedule, reduc-
ing the average productivity of capital. Therefore, we can write the capital market clearing
condition (9) in productivity-adjusted terms as:
˜kM
nt =γξ
− 1
θ
nntknnt =γξ
θ−1
θ
nntknt,
˜kS
Nt =
∑
n∈N
γξ
− 1
θ
nNtknNt =
∑
n∈N
γξ
θ−1
θ
nNtknt,
22This imperfect substitutability is consistent with slavery investments being concentrated in cane sugar, to-
bacco, cotton and coﬀee, none of which could be eﬃciently produced domestically at the time. It is also in line
with the theoretical and empirical literature on asset demand systems following Koijen and Yogo (2019).
19
--- Page 21 ---
where we use the tilde above the capital stock to denote the productivity-adjustment;γξ
− 1
θ
nit is
the average productivity of capital;γ≡ Γ
(θ−1
θ
)
; and Γ (·) denotes the Gamma function.
Again using the properties of the Fréchet distribution, the expected return to capital taking
into account the idiosyncratic productivity draws is equalized across locations:
vnt =vnnt =vnNt =γ

 ∑
m∈{n,N}
(rmt/φnmt)θ


1
θ
. (10)
Intuitively, if locationi has better investment characteristics in the form of a higher rental
rate (rit) or lower /f_inancial frictions (φnit), it attracts investments with lower idiosyncratic
realizations for productivity, which reduces the capital productivity of capital through a com-
position eﬀect. With a Fréchet distribution for capital productivity, this composition eﬀect ex-
actly oﬀsets the impact of the better investment characteristics, such that the expected return
to capital is equalized across locations. Therefore, the rental rate for capital can diﬀer between
local manufacturing and the colonial plantation (rnt̸= rNt), but the expected return to capi-
tal taking into account the idiosyncratic productivity draws is equalized (vnnt = vnNt = vnt).
Total capitalist income is linear in the existing capital stock:Vnt =vntknt.
A key implication of this speci/f_ication is that capital market integration acts like an im-
provement in the productivity of the investment technology. To illustrate this point, note that
the expected return to capital (vnt) in equation (10) can be re-written in terms of the domestic
investment share (ξnnt) using equation (8):
vnt = γ (rnt/φnnt)
(ξnnt)
1
θ
. (11)
In steady-state, the expected return to capital (vnt) is pinned down by no-arbitrage with the rate
of return on the consumption bond (v∗
n−δpn =ρ).23 Other things equal, a locationn with bet-
ter access to slavery investments (lower colonial /f_inancial frictionsφnNt) has a lower domestic
investment share (lowerξnnt) on the right-hand side of equation (11), which requires a lower
rental rate (rnt) for the equation to hold. Intuitively, obtaining access to slavery investments
acts like an improvement in investment productivity, because capitalists obtain another set of
draws for idiosyncratic productivity for the colonial plantation, which increases the average
productivity of the investments that they choose to undertake in equilibrium. This increased
average productivity of investment raises the rate of return to capital accumulation, which
leads to a higher steady-state capital stock, and hence a lower steady-state rental rate.
23A similar result holds in the absence of the consumption bond, in which case the steady-state expected return
to capital is exogenously determined by parameters and the consumption price index:v∗
n =pn(1−β(1−δ))/β.
20
--- Page 22 ---
6.6 Capital Allocation Across Periods
Capitalists choose consumption and investment to maximize intertemporal utility subject to
their budget constraint:
max
{cnt,ant+1}
{
Uk
nt =
∞∑
t=0
βt lnck
nt
}
, (12)
subject topntck
nt +pnt (ant+1−ant) =Rntant,
whereRnt is the gross return to assets:Rnt = max{vnt−δpnt,ρ}.
Given the linearity of capitalists’ income in the existing stock of assets, equilibrium invest-
ments are characterized by a corner solution. If the expected return to capital net of depreci-
ation (vnt−δpnt) exceeds the return from the consumption bond (ρ), capitalists invest all in
capital up to the collateral constraint (λn): knt = λnant· 1{(vnt−δpnt)>ρ}. We assume that col-
lateral constraints do not bind in steady-state. Therefore, the expected return to capital equals
the return from the consumption bond in steady-state:vnt−δpnt =ρ.
Given our assumption of logarithmic utility, capitalists’ optimal consumption-saving de-
cisions are characterized by a constant saving rate, as in Moll (2014):
ant+1 =β (Rnt/pnt + 1)ant. (13)
Therefore, although the saving rate is here endogenous, capital accumulation takes a sim-
ilar form as in the conventional Solow-Swan model. There exists a steady-state capital-labor
ratio in each location. If the initial capital stock in a location diﬀers from this steady-state
value, consumption smoothing implies that capitalists gradually accumulate or decumulate
capital along the transition path towards this steady-state.
6.7 Slavery and Industrialization
Given time-invariant values of the exogenous variables, we show in PropositionC.1 in Online
Appendix C.11 that there exists a unique steady-state equilibrium of the model. We now use
the model to characterize the aggregate impact and distributional consequences of greater
access to slavery investments. In particular, we undertake a comparative static in which we
reduce colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnN) from prohibitive values for all locations (such that
ξnn = 1 for all n) to /f_inite values for some locationsn (such that ξnn < 1 for some n, as
observed in our data). We hold constant world prices (pAW ,pMW ,pSW ) and other exogenous
fundamentals. Therefore, this comparative static captures the pure impact of greater access
to slavery investments through capital accumulation. We show that the domestic investment
share (ξnn) is a suﬃcient statistic for the impact of colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnN) on steady-
state economic activity, as summarized in the following proposition.
21
--- Page 23 ---
Proposition 1. (Slavery and Industrialization) Other things equal, in steady-state equilib-
rium, locations with better access to slavery investments (lower φnN and hence lowerξ∗
nn) have (i)
lower agricultural employment (ℓ A∗
n ); (ii) higher manufacturing employment (ℓ M∗
n ); (iii) higher
total population (ℓ∗
n); (iv) a lower rental rate for capital (r ∗
n); (v) higher wages (w L∗
n ) and worker
real income (wL∗
n /pn); (vi) lower price of agricultural land (q∗
n); (vii) higher productivity-adjusted
and unadjusted stocks of capital (˜k∗
n,k∗
n); (viii) higher productivity-adjusted and unadjusted stocks
of capital in domestic manufacturing ( ˜kM∗
n , kM∗
n ); (ix) higher capitalist real income (v ∗
nk∗
n/pn);
(x) lower landlord real income (q∗
nmn/pn).
Proof. See Section C.12 of the online appendix.
The proposition re/f_lects the net eﬀect of counteracting forces. On the one hand, for a given
stock of capital (kn), the fall in colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnN) reduces the capital allocated
to local manufacturing (lower knn) through a conventional substitution eﬀect. On the other
hand, the fall in colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnN) acts like an improvement in the productivity
of the investment technology, which increases the return to capital accumulation, and raises
the steady-state capital stock (k∗
n). The proposition establishes that the second eﬀect domi-
nates the /f_irst in steady-state, such that the fall in colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnN) increases
the steady-state allocation of capital to local manufacturing (higher k∗
nn). In the new steady-
state, the expected return to capital (v∗
n) is again equal to the unchanged rate of return on the
consumption bond (ρ), but the increase in the steady-state capital stock leads to a fall in the
steady-state rental rate (r∗
n).
The remaining parts of the proposition follow from the speci/f_ic-factors structure of pro-
duction and population mobility. Given constant prices and zero-pro/f_its in manufacturing, a
lower steady-state rental rate (r∗
n) raises the steady-state wage (w∗
n). Given constant prices and
zero-pro/f_its in agriculture, a higher steady-state wage (w∗
n) reduces the steady-state price of
land (q∗
n). Additionally, higher wages imply higher worker real income (w ∗
n/pn) for constant
goods prices, which increases steady-state population (ℓ∗
n). A higher steady-state allocation of
capital to local manufacturing (k∗
nn) raises labor’s value marginal product in manufacturing,
which together with the increase in steady-state population (ℓ∗
n) implies higher manufactur-
ing employment (ℓM∗
n ). Finally, given constant prices and a /f_ixed supply of land, the higher
steady-state wage (w∗
n) implies lower agricultural employment (ℓA∗
n ).
Therefore, we /f_ind that improved access to slavery investments both changes the structure
of economic activity within locations (stimulating industrialization and structural transfor-
mation away from agriculture) and also changes the spatial distribution of economic activity
across locations (raising population density in locations with better access to slavery invest-
ments and reducing population density elsewhere). Since the reduction in /f_inancial frictions
22
--- Page 24 ---
with the colonial plantation acts like an improvement in investment productivity, aggregate
real income across all locations and factors of production (capitalists, workers and landowners)
increases. But there are distributional consequences across the diﬀerent factors of production.
Given an unchanged supply of land (mn) and constant goods prices (pn), the fall in the price
of agricultural land (qn) in locations with better access to slavery investments reduces the real
income of landowners (q∗
nmn/pn). Additionally, given an unchanged expected return to capi-
tal (v∗
n) and constant goods prices (pn), the increase in the capital stock (kn) in locations with
better access to slavery investments raises the real income of capitalists (v∗
nk∗
n/pn).
Finally, we focus for brevity here on steady-state impacts, where collateral constraints do
not bind. However, if slavery wealth is more collateralizable than other wealth, better access
to slavery investments also can relax collateral constraints (higherλn), and hence raise capital
accumulation along the transition path to steady-state.
7 Main Empirical Results
A key prediction of our theoretical framework is that improved access to slavery investments
stimulates local capital accumulation and induces an expansion of the capital-intensive man-
ufacturing sector. We now provide empirical evidence in support of this prediction using
exogenous variation in access to slavery investments (and hence slaveholder wealth in 1833)
from the middle-passage mortality experienced by slave-trading ancestors. In Section 7.1, we
introduce our identi/f_ication strategy, explain the construction of our instrument, and provide
some empirical evidence in support of our causal argument. In Section7.2, we report our main
instrumental variables estimation results for a range of economic outcomes. In Section7.3, we
summarize a range of robustness checks that probe our main /f_indings. Finally, in Section7.4,
we use our theoretical model to quantify the aggregate and distributional consequences of
access to slavery investments.
7.1 Identi/f_ication Strategy
Our identi/f_ication strategy uses the well-known link between slave trading and slaveholding.
Many families started out slave trading, and through the resulting connections to the slave
economy, transitioned into slaveholding (as discussed in Hall et al. 2014). Therefore, we de-
velop an instrument for slaveholder wealth in a location in 1833 based on the middle-passage
mortality that aﬀected the investment of slave-traders hailing from the same location.
We assign slave traders to the locations of slaveholders in 1833 in two ways. First, we use
genealogical information from family trees to link slaveholder locations to slave traders’ areas
of ancestral origin. Second, we use the geographical concentration of surnames in Britain to
23
--- Page 25 ---
probabilistically assign slave traders to locations, and then connect them to slaveholders living
in each location in 1833.
In our baseline speci/f_ication, we use middle-passage mortality to construct our baseline
voyage-outcome measure. Since middle-passage mortality is only available for a subset of
slave voyages, we also report robustness tests in which we use only variation in the number
of ancestors of slave traders (for which we do not require mortality data), or in which we use
the number of slave voyages as an alternative indirect measure of voyage outcomes. We now
discuss in further the construction of our instrument and the causal logic underlying it.
Middle-Passage Mortality The key ideas underlying our identi/f_ication strategy are out-
lined in Figure 5. First, starting from the top-left, idiosyncratic wind conditions had a substan-
tial eﬀect on voyage duration across the Atlantic. Second, voyage duration was an important
determinant of slave mortality during the middle-passage under crowded, insanitary and in-
humane conditions on slave ships. As sailing times increased, water ran out and infectious dis-
eases spread, leading to sharp increases in middle-passage mortality. Third, moving further to
the right, higher middle-passage mortality reduced the pro/f_itability of slave-trading voyages.
Fourth, moving downwards, this reduction in voyage pro/f_itability from adverse wind con-
ditions discouraged (or made impossible) future participation of slave traders in subsequent
slave voyages, given the substantial upfront costs involved. Fifth, moving further downwards,
lower involvement in the slave trade reduced the likelihood of traders making the transition
to slaveholding as plantation owners, and the wealth they could use to do so. In sum, since
bad weather shocks both directly lowered trader wealth, and induced exit from the slave trade,
they reduced slaveholder wealth in 1833 at the time of abolition.
Causal Mechanism We now provide evidence in support of the steps in this causal chain.
Wind speed and direction were the main determinants of ship speed and voyage times in the
age of sail (Pascali 2017). Both /f_luctuated with atmospheric conditions. Around the equator, a
lack of surface winds can becalm sailing ships for weeks, which is why sailors refer to them as
dolldrums. This is re/f_lected in analyses of ship log books, where slave-trading voyages from
West Africa to the West Indies took between 25-60 days, as discussed inHaines et al.(2001) and
Cohn and Jensen (1982). When voyages took longer than expected, and drinking water ran
out, the horrendous conditions aboard for enslaved persons led to sharp increases in mortality,
as documented in Kiple and Higgins (1989).
24
--- Page 26 ---
Figure 5: Identi/f_ication Strategy
(Wind) Sailing time Enslaved mortality (Voyage pro/f_its)
Slav
e-trade involvement
Slav
e-holding in 1833
Economic outcomes, post-1833
estimated
r
educed form
Note:
Solid arrows are causal relationships; dashed arrows are estimated relationships; variables in parentheses
are unobserved; dotted arrows are reduced-form relationships.
We use data from the Slave Voyages database to corroborate the relationship between sail-
ing time and enslaved mortality. In Figure 6a, we show a histogram of middle-passage mor-
tality across all slave voyages from British ports. We /f_ind large diﬀerences in middle-passage
mortality. While many voyages experienced mortality rates of 5-10 percent, some saw rates of
20 percent or more. These diﬀerences in mortality are heavily in/f_luenced by sailing time. To
illustrate this, Figure 6b presents a binscatter plot of the relationship between middle-passage
mortality and the duration in days of the voyage from West Africa to the Americas. Consis-
tent with the historical literature emphasizing voyage duration as the main determinant of
middle-passage mortality, we see a strong and positive relationship between sailing time and
mortality. Ten extra voyage days increase the mortality rate by 2.3 percentage points. For a
ship carrying 350 enslaved persons, this corresponds to 8 additional deaths.
Financing slave-trading voyages required considerable upfront capital investments in ship
and crew and to purchase slaves in West Africa. The main source of revenue was the sale
of the enslaved in the Americas. Therefore, high mortality rates on slave-trading voyages
could result in substantial losses for the slave traders involved. Speci/f_ically, we expect voy-
age duration and middle-passage mortality to be key in enabling continued involvement in
the slave trade. To establish this link, Figure 7 displays mean continuation probabilities for
slave traders across the number of slave voyages n. We compute these mean continuation
probabilities from voyagen ton + 1 separately for slave traders that experienced above and
below-median middle-passage mortality during voyagen.24 Consistent with the idea that ad-
verse wind conditions and low voyage pro/f_its made it less likely that individuals were able
24Table B.3 in Online Appendix B.3, we provide further evidence that voyage failure, as recorded by the Slave
Voyage Database, became more common the longer the middle passage lasted.
25
--- Page 27 ---
Figure 6: Middle-passage Mortality and Voyage Duration for Slave Voyages
(a) Histogram of middle-passage mortality
 (b) Voyage duration and mortality
Note: Left panel: The /f_igure shows a histogram of the mortality rates among the enslaved ((enslaved embarked
- enslaved disembarked)/enslaved embarked) across slave-trading voyages from British ports. Right panel: The
/f_igure shows a binscatter of the duration of slave-trading voyages from British ports (horizontal axis) and mor-
tality rates among the enslaved (vertical axis); blue dots correspond to ventiles and the red dashed line shows the
linear /f_it.
to continue in the slave trade, we /f_ind lower continuation probabilities for slave traders who
experience above-median middle-passage mortality. For example, after 5 voyages, we /f_ind that
over one third of the owners who experienced below-median mortality of enslaved stayed in-
volved, whereas less than 20 percent of those exposed to above-median mortality continued
to participate.25
This pattern of results is consistent with selection on pro/f_itability in the slave trade. Those
who were lucky with wind conditions and made substantial voyage pro/f_its accumulated fur-
ther wealth and continued to participate in the slave trade. Those who were unlucky with
weather conditions and experienced substantial voyage losses dropped out of the slave trade.
Voyage Outcomes To implement our identi/f_ication strategy, we begin by constructing a
voyage outcome measure for slave traders based on middle-passage mortality. We observe a
decline in middle-passage mortality over time in the slave voyages data, in part because of
improvements in ship technology. To abstract from this secular decline and focus on variation
across voyages within the same time period, we remove decadal /f_ixed eﬀects from middle-
passage mortality. From the residuals, we construct our outcome measure for slave-trading
voyagej and ship owner or “voyager”v as the inverse of the mortality rate among the enslaved:
1/mortalityvj, where mortality equals the number of enslaved embarked, minus the number
25In Figure B.4 in Online Appendix B.3, we provide further evidence on this relationship between middle-
passage mortality and continuation probabilities in the slave trade.
26
--- Page 28 ---
Figure 7: Continued Involvement in the Slave Trade by Middle-passage Mortality
Note: Horizontal axes is number of slave voyagesn; Vertical axis is continuation probability from slave voyagen
to slave voyagen+1; mean probabilities of continued involvement shown separately for middle-passage voyages
with above and below median mortality among the enslaved during voyagen.
of enslaved disembarked, divided by the number of enslaved embarked. This voyage outcome
measure has a lower bound of one for voyages where all of the enslaved die, and approaches
in/f_inity as the number of deaths among the enslaved approaches zero.26
The slave voyages data report up to eight ship owners or “voyagers” for each slave voyage,
such that a given voyager can appear multiple times for diﬀerent slave voyages. We compute
the average voyage outcome for voyagerv as the average across all of their slave voyagesj:
VOv = 1
nv
nv∑
j=1
1
mortalityvj
, (14)
wherenv is the number of slave voyages for which voyagerv is observed.
Family Trees In our baseline speci/f_ication, we combine data on slave traders’ voyage out-
comes and the location of their ancestors, using family trees on Ancestry.com. Often, families
hailing from a particular place would see one of theirs work and live in a major trading port
for a few years – but the majority of the family network, including many individuals who
inherit or bene/f_it from the business advice of a relative, remained near the ancestral home.
For example, the Lascelles family initially lived in Stank Hall, Yorkshire; three of the family’s
26For the small number of voyages with zero mortality among the enslaved, we use 0 +ϵ = 0.005 to avoid
this voyage outcome measure becoming unde/f_ined for voyages with no deaths.
27
--- Page 29 ---
male descendants became slave traders, participating in 14 voyages between 1699 and 1736.
By 1787, the Lascelles owned 27,000 acres in Barbados, Jamaica, Grenada, and Tobago. All
the male lines save one eventually died out, so that only one of them - Henry, second Earl of
Harewood (1767-1841) - received slavery compensation under the terms of the Abolition of
Slavery Act, as shown in the family tree in Figure B.2 in Online Appendix B.1. By then, the
Lascelles had returned to Yorkshire, building their country home.
Using the family trees reported on Ancestry.com, we identify 20,000 ancestors of these
voyagers, as discussed further in Online Appendix G. We collect birth and death addresses
for the parents, grandparents and great grandparents of these voyagers. We also distinguish
between two groups among slave-trading ancestors: successful traders (in the sense of more
than one slave-trading voyage) and all other traders (with only one slave-trading voyage). For
each location i, we compute our /f_irst average voyage outcome instrument (VOI tree
i ) as an
average of the voyager outcomes across all slave-trading ancestors in that location:
VOI tree
i = 1
A
Ai∑
a=1
VOv(a), (15)
whereAi is the number of ancestors of slave-traders in location i; A is the total number of
ancestors of slave-traders in England and Wales; VOv(a) is the average voyage outcome for
voyagerv who is the descendant of ancestor a, as de/f_ined in equation (14) above, where the
notationv(a) makes explicit that voyagerv is matched to ancestora; the scaling by1/A rather
than 1/Ai outside the summation ensures that the instrument increases with the number of
slave-trading ancestors in a location, and implies that it captures a location’s share of slave-
trading ancestors in England and Wales weighted by their voyage outcomes.
In our /f_irst-stage regression, we predict slaveholding in 1833 in a location using this instru-
ment for the average voyage outcome of slave-traders with ancestors in that location. Note
that this instrumental variables estimation does not require there to exist direct family con-
nections between individual slaveholders in 1833 in a given location and the ancestors of slave
traders in that same location. The presence of ancestors of slave traders in a location could
have predictive power for slave holding there in 1833 because of indirect connections: For ex-
ample, slave traders could pass information about opportunities for slaveholding investments
through friends, business and social networks that are correlated with their familial locations.
In Table 1, we report a balance test for three groups of locations – those without ancestors
involved in the slave trade, those with successful ancestors in the slave trade, and those with
unsuccessful ancestors in the slave trade. For all indicators of economic conditions before
the large-scale expansion of Britain’s role in the slave trade starting in the 1640s, we /f_ind no
signi/f_icant diﬀerences in property values for regions that were home to successful and unsuc-
cessful voyagers. But regions that never engaged in the slave trade show lower levels of wealth
28
--- Page 30 ---
and industrial activity after the expansion of British involvement in the slave trade from the
1640s onwards. The remaining rows compare geographic location (as measured by latitude
and longitude) and geographical distance from ports. Successful slave traders’ ancestral re-
gions do not have signi/f_icantly diﬀerent latitudes or longitudes but they are located slightly
closer to Liverpool. The absence of major diﬀerences between columns 2 and 3 suggests that
our instrument is as good as randomly assigned across regions.
Table 1: Balance Test – Ancestors and Middle Passage Mortality
(1)
(2) (3) T-test
None Unsucessful Successful Diﬀerence
Variable Mean/SE Mean/SE Mean/SE (1)-(2) (1)-(3) (2)-(3)
Domesday
Wealth (1086) 4.67
(0.05)
4.80
(0.09)
5.09
(0.08)
-0.13 -0.43*** -0.30***
Wealth Subsidy (1334) 4.04
(0.05)
4.03
(0.11)
4.35
(0.09)
0.01 -0.31 -0.31**
Property Wealth (1690) 7.84
(0.04)
8.21
(0.06)
8.36
(0.06)
-0.37* -0.52*** -0.15***
Cotton Mills (1788) 0.05
(0.01)
0.43
(0.06)
0.10
(0.03)
-0.38*** -0.06 0.33***
Longitude -1.97
(0.08)
-1.80
(0.10)
-1.44
(0.11)
-0.18 -0.53** -0.35***
Latitude 52.50
(0.06)
52.66
(0.09)
52.23
(0.09)
-0.16** 0.28 0.44***
Dist Historic Port 19.47
(0.65)
22.82
(1.32)
21.08
(1.19)
-3.35* -1.61 1.74
Dist Liverpool 214.46
(3.80)
162.17
(7.65)
217.35
(6.54)
52.29*** -2.89 -55.18***
N 511 170 170
Note: The value displayed for t-tests are the diﬀerences in the means across the groups. Standard errors are
robust. Group 1 is the set of regions without any identi/f_ied ancestors of slave voyagers. Groups 2 and 3 split
those regions with ancestors into above and below voyage outcomes (recall that voyage outcomes are inversely
related to middle-passage mortality). Wealth and count variables are inverse hyperbolic sine transformed. The
control variable IHS of population in 1780 is included in all estimation regressions. All missing values in balance
variables are treated as the group mean. ***, **, and * indicate signi/f_icance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
In Table B.5in Online AppendixB.4, we provide evidence on the performance of the instru-
ment in the /f_irst-stage when we use only the share of ancestors as an instrument (without tak-
ing into account middle-passage mortality) versus including information on middle-passage
mortality (as in our baseline speci/f_ication in equation (15)). We show that the /f_irst-stage F-
statistic increases when we incorporate mortality information, consistent with our mecha-
nism. The gain is visible both with and without controls; and the /f_inal instrument, mortality
29
--- Page 31 ---
scaled, is strong for both family trees (here) and surnames (below).
Surnames in the 1851 Fullcount Census Our /f_irst IV above exploits direct genealogical
connections between slave traders and their ancestors. However, family trees onAncestry.com
are not available for all traders, and this selection could be non-random: Successful slave-
trading families could be either more or less likely to have detailed family records. To address
this potential concern, we also use the national distribution of all surnames (from the 1851
population census) to measure regional links with families in the slave trade. This strategy
exploits the persistent geographical concentration of surnames in Britain (Cheshire and Lon-
gley 2011) and assumes that concentrations of slave voyager surnames in 1851 are informative
about their familial locations. While less precise than the family-tree instrument, this strategy
is exhaustive. It provides a useful cross-validation of our family-tree instrument.
The 1851 census contains a total ofN = 17, 474, 083 individuals withS = 330, 329 distinct
surnames. The surname distribution is heavily skewed (Fox and Lasker 1983,Güell et al. 2014).
The two most common surnames, Smith and Jones, account for about 1.4 percent of all indi-
viduals, while 37 percent of names occur only once. Of the 2,259 distinct voyager surnames,
we can match 90 percent (2,040) to at least one individual in the 1851 census. Comparing the
voyager and non-voyager surnames, we /f_ind that voyager surnames are a bit more common
than non-voyager surnames.
We use the voyager surnames observed in the 1851 census to predict the spatial distribution
of voyagers’ familial locations. We observe the location of named individuals in the 1851
census by parish. To account for the frequency and spatial dispersion of surnames, we use
Monte Carlo simulations, in which we randomly match all slave voyagers (unique in /f_irst name
and surname) to individuals in the 1851 census using their surname. For example, we observe
21 slave voyagers with the surname Smith. We randomly match these 21 observations with
21 of the 240,117 individuals named Smith in the 1851 census. 27 For each of these voyager-
surname matches m, we use a voyager’s average voyage outcome across all of their slave
voyages (VOv), as de/f_ined in equation (14) above. For each regioni, we compute the sum of
voyage outcome measures of all voyagers matched to surnames in that region. Finally, we
repeat this procedure for iterations l ={1,...,L}, where L = 1, 000. Our second average
voyage outcome instrument for each regioni is an average across these iterations:
VOI sname
i = 1
L
n∑
l=1
Mil∑
m=1
VOv(m), (16)
27We take the number of voyagers directly from the slave voyages dataset. Alternatively, one could make an
assumption about their population growth rate, and in/f_late their number between their slave voyage year and
1851. This procedure would give more weight to earlier voyagers. Since we /f_ind that this adjustment does not
make a great diﬀerence, we refrain from further complicating the measure.
30
--- Page 32 ---
where the outer summation averages across iterations for a given region i; the inner sum-
mation counts the voyager-surname matches for that region in a given iteration l;Mil is the
number of voyager-surname matches in regioni for iterationl; the notationv(m) makes ex-
plicit that voyagerv is assigned to voyager-surname matchm.
Figure 8: Bivariate Plots of Slaveholding and Ancestral Connections to the Slave Trade
(a) Family Trees
 (b) Surnames
Note: The bi-plot displays tertiles of the distribution of familial connections to the slave trade as measured by
family trees (left panel) and surnames (right panel) against terciles of slaveholding across English and Welsh
parishes. Data are constructed for our 849 hexagonal regions and cross-walked into parishes based on their
centroids for the purposes of the visualization.
Figure 8 shows bi-variate plots of our voyage outcome instruments and slaveholders in
1833, with the left panel displaying the family-tree instrument (VOI tree
i ), and the right panel
displaying the surname instrument (VOI sname
i ). Grey areas show neither slaveholding nor
familial connections to slave traders; dark brown indicates a strong con/f_luence of both. Where
areas of the map are only red, there are many ancestral connections to slave trading but few
1833 slaveholders; where areas of the map are blue, there are many 1833 slaveholders but
few ancestral connections to slave trading. The map shows that slaveholding and familial
connections to the slave trade were widespread; and in many places, they coincide. Comparing
both maps, we see strong overlap in the areas around London, Bristol and Liverpool, but also
in numerous other locations in England and Wales.
7.2 Instrumental Variables Estimation
We now use our two instrumental variables to estimate the impact of slavery wealth on eco-
nomic development. We start with our baseline empirical results for cross-section patterns
31
--- Page 33 ---
of economic development in the 1830s. Next, we check the plausibility of our IV strategy
using never-takers: regions where ancestors of slave traders lived, but where no slaveholders
dwelled in 1833. Finally, we provide evidence on the importance of capital accumulation using
repeated cross-sections of steam power adoption over time.
Baseline Estimations Our goal is to estimate the eﬀect of 1833 slaveholding wealth across
regionsi (Si) on measures of economic development (Yi). To establish causality, we instrument
1833 slaveholding (Si) with our voyage outcome instruments (VOI i) discussed above:
Yi =C2 +β ˆSi +δX′
i +ϵi (17)
Si =C1 +αVOI i +γX′
i +ρi (18)
whereC1 andC2 are regression constants;X′ is a vector of control variables for other deter-
minants of economic activity, including the population in 1780, latitude, longitude, distance to
the nearest county bank or post town, the count of cotton mills in 1788, distance to the coast
and our measure of property wealth in 1690; andϵi andρi are stochastic errors.
Table 2, Panel A reports results from our IV-estimation, using the family tree instrument.
Col. 1 shows a strong relationship with high /f_irst-stage F-stats, well above the conventional
levels and Anderson-Rubin p-values that are below 0.01 (or at 0.01 in col. 6, Panel A). This
underlines the relevance of our instrument. A one standard deviation increase in the voyage
outcome measure using ancestors implies a 0.16 standard deviation increase in slaveholder
wealth in 1833. Instrumented slave claims strongly and positively predict the number of steam
engines in the region (col. 2). It is also associated with higher property taxes in 1815 (col. 3),
and negatively predicts employment in agriculture (col. 3). Employment in manufacturing is
higher (col. 4), as is the number of cotton mills (col. 5).
We standardize all variables to facilitate the interpretation of the inverse hyperbolic sine
transformed measures. Therefore, our estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase
in compensation payments translates into a 1.78 standard deviation increase in steam engines,
a 0.52 standard deviation increase in rateable values, a 0.61 standard deviation decrease in
agricultural employment contrasted by a 0.88 standard deviation increase in manufacturing
employment and a 0.79 standard deviation decrease in the average distance to the ten near-
est cotton mills in 1839. We also derive elasticities following the approach in Bellemare and
Wichman (2020) and report them at the bottom of the table. Doubling slave claims implies a
287 percent increase in steam engines, an 11 percent increase in rateable values, 8 percentage
points less agricultural employment, 13 percentage points more manufacturing employment
and a 7.81 percent more mills in the region.28
28At the extensive margin, a 10 percent increase in slave claims increases the probability to host a mill by 3.48
32
--- Page 34 ---
Table 2: IV: Voyage Outcome Instruments
(1)
(2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
SlaveClaims SteamEng-1830 PropTax1815 %Agric1831 %Manuf1831 CottonMill-1839
A.
VO-Scaled Ancestors 0.164***
(0.03)
Slave Claims 1.760*** 0.523** -0.614*** 0.861*** 0.774***
(0.42) (0.22) (0.17) (0.25) (0.29)
N
Voyagers 286 286 286 286 286 286
Elasticity 0.14 2.90 0.11 -0.08 0.13 0.58
KPW F-Stat 30.64 30.64 30.64 30.64 30.64
AR p-value 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.01
B.
VO-Scaled Surnames 0.435***
(0.05)
Slave Claims 0.736*** 0.561*** -1.360*** 1.249*** 0.695***
(0.20) (0.09) (0.17) (0.18) (0.12)
N
Voyagers 2040 2040 2040 2040 2040 2040
Elasticity 1.82 1.21 0.12 -0.19 0.18 0.52
KPW F-Stat 77.18 77.18 77.18 77.18 77.18
AR p-value 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Obser
vations 849 849 849 849 849 849
Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Standardised coeﬃcients with robust standard errors in parenthesis. Slave
claims and the outcomes in columns 1–3 and 6 are IHS-transformed. Instrument is the grid cell share of voyager
ancestors, scaled by inverse middle-passage mortality (Panel A) or voyager surnames scaled by inverse middle-
passage mortality (Panel B).
This pattern of results is robust across diﬀerent speci/f_ications. In TableB.8 in Online Ap-
pendix B.4, we demonstrate that we /f_ind similar results using a log-transformation instead
of the inverse hyperbolic sine. Our baseline speci/f_ication controls for 1690 property wealth,
which implies that our results capture changes in economic performance since then. But our
results are not dependent on controls. In Online Appendix B.4, we show additional results
without control variables, and also report the estimated coeﬃcients for all control variables.
Our baseline speci/f_ication uses robust standard errors, because our 849 regions are relatively
large, which helps to alleviate potential concerns about spatially correlated errors. In Online
Appendix B.4, we report results using Heteroskedasticity Autocorrelation Consistent (HAC)
standard errors following Conley (1999). Again, we /f_ind a similar pattern of results.
In Panel B of Table 2, we repeat the estimations using the surname instrument. Both in-
struments are positively correlated (as evident from Figure8). Since inferring family ties from
surnames is more noisy than using a genealogy measure, we think of the surname speci/f_ication
as providing validation of our empirical strategy. Again, the instrument is strong with /f_irst-
stage F-statistics well above the conventional levels. The /f_irst stage suggests that a 1 standard
percentage points or 12 percent relative to the mean probability of 27.4 percentage points.
33
--- Page 35 ---
deviation increase in the voyage outcome measure based on surnames implies 0.44 standard
deviation higher claims in 1833. Overall, instrumenting slave claims with the alternative sur-
name instrument leads to qualitatively and quantitatively similar results.
To sum up: Regions from which slave traders experiencing bene/f_icial conditions hailed had
more slave wealth in 1833. This had eﬀects on economic development: land values increased,
consistent with increased urbanization. The share of employment in agriculture declined, the
share in manufacturing increased, there were more industrial establishments and more steam
engines in the vicinity.
Figure 9: Beta Coeﬃcients for our IV Speci/f_ication and Never-takers
(a) Family Tree Instrument
(b) Surname Instrument
Note: Beta coeﬃcients with 95% con/f_idence intervals from IV estimations using the voyage outcome instrument
based on family trees (left panel) or surnames (right panel) and reduced form OLS regressions for nevertaker
regions with no slaveholding.
Never-takers A simple plausibility check for our IV-strategy in the spirit of Bound and
Jaeger (2000), Angrist and Krueger (1994), and D’Haultfœuille et al. (2022) looks at never-
taker regions where ancestors of slave traders lived, but where we /f_ind no slave wealth in
1833. If our argument is correct, regions that merely had exposure to the slave trade –without
slave-holding later– should not show any statistically signi/f_icant diﬀerences in economic per-
formance.
Figure 9 plots the coeﬃcients for our main outcome variables for our baseline IV speci/f_i-
cation and the never-takers (left: family-tree instrument; right: surnames). 29 We /f_ind much
larger standardised coeﬃcients for our IV speci/f_ication, whereas the never-takers show much
smaller estimates and in many cases, precisely-estimated zeros.30
Taken together, these empirical results provide strong support for the mechanism in our
model: Exogenous increases in access to slavery wealth stimulate local capital accumulation,
29In this never-takers speci/f_ication, we estimate reduced-form regressions of our main outcomes on our mea-
sures of familial connections to the slave-trade for regions with no slaveholding in 1833.
30Table B.15 in Online Appendix B.4 reports the estimated coeﬃcients for the never-taker analysis.
34
--- Page 36 ---
which induces a reallocation of economic activity towards the manufacturing sector.
Steam Power Adoption Steam power was arguably one of the key technologies of the In-
dustrial Revolution, and associated with important improvements in productivity and estab-
lishment size (Atack et al. 2008). Adopting its use required a range of technological inventions
and innovations, and was costly. Here, we present evidence from the adoption of steam power
over time, showing that areas with more slaveholding in 1833 had an increasing edge.
Table 3: IV: Steam Engine Adoption and Slaveholding
(1)
(2) (3) (4)
Pre-1792 1792-1830 1830-1850 Post-1850
A.
VO-Scaled Ancestors 0.280 1.760*** 1.427*** 1.282***
(0.26) (0.42) (0.35) (0.31)
KP
W F-Stat 30.64 30.64 30.64 30.64
AR p-value 0.28 0.00 0.00 0.00
Elasticity 1.17 2.90 1.87 1.32
B.
VO-Scaled Surnames 0.367** 0.736*** 0.884*** 1.072***
(0.18) (0.20) (0.18) (0.19)
KP
W F-Stat 77.18 77.18 77.18 77.18
AR p-value 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00
Elasticity 1.53 1.21 1.16 1.11
Obser
vations 849 849 849 849
Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Panels A and B give standardised IV coeﬃcients with robust standard
errors in parenthesis. Outcome is IHS count of articles mentioning steam engines from the British Newspaper
Archive in the indicated time period. The independent variable is IHS of slave claims. The instrument in Panel
A is the region share of voyager ancestors, scaled by voyage outcome (inverse middle-passage mortality). The
instrument in Panel B is the region share of voyager surname matches, again scaled by voyage outcome (inverse
middle-passage mortality). Standard controls are included in all regressions.
In Figure B.3a in Online Appendix B.1, we illustrate the geography of steam engine adop-
tion, by showing the count of articles mentioning steam engines between 1792 and 1830. In
Figure B.3b in Online Appendix B.1, we display binscatters of steam engine adoption in diﬀer-
ent time periods against slaveholding in 1833. In the period before 1792, there is hardly any
relationship existent, which is consistent with James Watt’s key innovations in the eﬃciency
of the steam engine taking place from 1763-75. Starting with the period 1792-1830, we /f_ind a
strong link between slavery and steam engine adoption. The eﬀect increases over time – and
the slave-owning areas’ edge grows in magnitude after 1830.
35
--- Page 37 ---
Table 3 reports corresponding instrumental variables speci/f_ications, in which we instru-
ment slaveholding in 1833 using our family-tree and surname instruments introduced in the
previous section. Corresponding OLS estimates are shown in Appendix Table B.1. Again we
/f_ind little evidence of a relationship before 1792 and a substantial strengthening of the relation-
ship over time. Both instruments lead to similar results: for the ancestor (surname) instrument
a 1 standard deviation increase in compensation claims implies a 0.28 (0.37) standard devia-
tion increase in newspaper articles mentioning steam engines before 1792 and this number
increases to 1.76 (0.74) standard deviations 1792-1830; 1.43 (0.88) standard deviations between
1830-50; and 1.29 (1.07) standard deviations after 1850.31
7.3 Robustness Tests
This section summarizes a number of robustness tests, focusing on the family-tree instrument
(see Appendix B.4 for a detailed discussion).
We /f_irst assess the presence of spatial auto-correlation (SAC), using Moran’s I. SAC be-
comes insigni/f_icantly diﬀerent from zero at around 500km for the majority of our regressions,
and for all within 750km. To ensure that the presence of SAC below these distances is not
unduly biasing our standard errors, we calculate Conley Spatial HAC standard errors (Conley
1999) which correct for cluster correlation in spatial settings. Even at a bandwidth distance of
750 km, our main results remain statistically signi/f_icant at conventional levels.
Second, we choose a diﬀerent procedure to assign parish-level observations to hexagons.
Our preferred approach assigns parishes to a hexagon if their centroid falls inside. The bene/f_it
of not employing area weights to map values into polygons is that we do not mechanically
introduce spatial auto-correlation. On the downside, we may assign large rural parishes to a
neighboring hexagon even though the majority of its area does not lie within it. To rule out
that our results depend on the speci/f_ic choice how we map parish information to hexagons,
we rerun our results using area weights. Our results remain unchanged. In a similar vain, we
experiment with hexagons of diﬀerent size. Our preferred hexagons span an area of around
9km from the center to vertex, which represents a plausible commuting distance at a time when
walking was the dominant transport mode. In Table B.13, we present speci/f_ications where we
consider parishes, the smallest political unit; registration districts; and grid of squares with
side length 0.2°, or roughly 20km. We /f_ind a similar quantitative and qualitative pattern of
results across each of these alternative choices of spatial units.
Third, we report a robustness test, in which we use the number of slave voyages as an
alternative measure of voyage outcomes. The logic is similar to our baseline speci/f_ication.
31In Table B.2 in Online AppendixB.2, we show that the same pattern holds if we examine the extensive margin
of steam engine adoption.
36
--- Page 38 ---
Slave voyagers who experienced a lower middle-passage mortality are more likely to engage
in more than one voyage. Therefore, higher values of the voyage-frequency instrument imply
better slave-voyage outcomes and thus a higher probability to remain engaged in the slave
trade. Again we /f_ind a similar pattern of results as in our baseline speci/f_ication.
In a last set of checks, we assess how much our results depend on the three major slave
ports, i.e. Bristol, Liverpool and London. Speci/f_ically, we exclude any region located within
30km of these slave ports and /f_ind that the magnitude and signi/f_icance of the coeﬃcients
again remain largely the same. Overall, we conclude that our /f_indings are not driven by the
major slave ports alone, consistent with Figure 8, which shows that compliers with the slavery
instrument are found across England and Wales.
7.4 Quantitative Analysis of the Model
Our empirical /f_indings so far have provided evidence of causal eﬀects of slaveholding on local
economic activity. We now use our theoretical model to assess the aggregate and distributional
consequences of access to slavery investments.
We assume standard values for the model’s parameters (Online Appendix D). We set the
share of land in agricultural costs as αA = 0.31, based on the share of land and buildings in
farm income in Feinstein (1972). Given this parameter, we set the share of capital in manufac-
turing costs asαM = 0.36, which ensures that the model is consistent with both the 20% share
of agriculture in national income in 1851 inDeane and Cole (1967), and the 65% share of labor
in national income in 1850 in Crafts (2022). We assume a migration elasticity of 1/κ = 2, as
a central value in the range of estimates in Bryan and Morten (2019) and Galle et al. (2020).
We assume an elasticity of substitution between domestic and slavery investments of θ = 4,
towards the high end of the estimates in Koijen and Yogo (2020). In Online Appendix E, we
demonstrate the robustness of our quantitative conclusions to the assumption of alternative
values for these parameters.
We quantify the model using our rateable values and employment data. 32 Our rateable
values data measure /f_low rental values from domestic capital and land. In contrast, slavery
compensation was rationalized as a one-oﬀ payment for the net present value of the labor of
enslaved persons. To convert this net present value into the corresponding /f_low value, we
assume a rate of return of 10 percent, which re/f_lects the high rates of mortality among en-
slaved persons and the risk associated with slavery investments (including the risk of slave
rebellion). Additionally, compensation values for enslaved persons were set at 40 percent of
market values, in part because of the implicit compensation through the “apprenticeship” sys-
tem. Therefore, we multiply the /f_low compensation values by 2.5 to obtain /f_low market values.
32See Online Appendix C.13-C.14 for further details on the quanti/f_ication of the model.
37
--- Page 39 ---
Finally, the total value of slavery plantations (including land and buildings) was typically 3
times the value of enslaved persons, according to the accounting studies in Sheridan (1965),
Ward (1978), and Rosenthal (2018). Therefore, we multiply the /f_low market values of enslaved
persons by 3 to obtain the /f_low market value of slavery investments. For the aggregate econ-
omy as a whole, the resulting /f_low income from these slavery investments equals 3.63 percent
of the /f_low income from all capital and land (including slavery capital, domestic capital and
land), which is in line with the estimates in Pebrer (1833).33
Our counterfactuals start at the observed equilibrium in the data in 1833 and evaluate the
impact of a prohibitive increase in colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnN→∞ for all n). We hold
goods price constant to focus purely on the impact of access to slavery investments through
capital accumulation. For ease of interpretation, we report the changes in variables from the
counterfactual equilibrium to the observed equilibrium in the data, such that the results corre-
spond to the impact of improved access to slavery investments. We denote the counterfactual
equilibrium value of variables with a prime, the observed equilibrium values with no prime,
and the relative changes between the two equilibria with a hat (such that ˆxn = x′
n/xn). We
assume that the observed equilibrium in the data on 1833 is close to the steady-state in the
absence of any further changes in the exogenous variables, and we report counterfactuals for
the steady-state impact of the changes in colonial /f_inancial frictions.34
We begin by quantifying the impact of slavery investments on the spatial distribution of
economic activity. In the left panel of Figure 10, we display locally-weighted linear least
squares regressions across locations of log changes in total employment (ln ( ℓ∗
n/ℓ∗′
n )) on the
observed share of slavery capital in total capital in 1833 (ξ ∗
nN = K∗
nN/(K∗
nN +K∗
nn)), where
recallξnN+ξnn = 1. Consistent with our analytical results in Proposition1 and our causal esti-
mates in the previous subsection, we /f_ind that greater access to slavery investments increases
a location’s total employment: The log relative changes in total employment are substantial,
ranging from 0.98 (a 2 percent decline) to 1.43 (a 43 percent increase).
In the right panel of Figure 10, we show analogous locally-weighted linear least squares
regressions for log changes in agricultural employment shares (
(
ℓA∗
n /ℓ∗
n
)
/
(
ℓA∗′
n /ℓ∗′
n
)
). Again
in line with our earlier theoretical and empirical results, we /f_ind that greater access to slavery
investments induces greater structural transformation away from agriculture. The magnitudes
are substantial: The log change in agricultural employment shares ranges from 1.02 (a 2 per-
cent increase) for those locations with no slavery investments to 0.47 (a 47 percent decline)
for those locations with the greatest participation in slavery investments.
33According to Pebrer (1833), the value of all capital and land in the West Indies was 3.44 percent of the value
of all capital and land in both the United Kingdom and the West Indies in 1833.
34To the extent that the full steady-state impact of British participation in slavery had not been realized by the
1830s, our estimates underestimate this full steady-state impact, and hence are likely conservative.
38
--- Page 40 ---
Figure 10: Counterfactual Changes in Total Employment and Agricultural Employment Shares
from Access to Slavery Investments
1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
Log Change
0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Share of Slavery Capital in Total Capital
Total Employment
.5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
Log Change
0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Share of Slavery Capital in Total Capital
Agricultural Employment Share
Note: Vertical axis in left panel shows log changes in total employment across locations; vertical axis in right panel
shows log changes in agricultural employment shares across locations; horizontal axis in both panels displays
the share of slavery investments in total investments in the 1830s; both panels show locally-weighted linear least
square regressions of the changes from the counterfactual equilibrium (without slavery investments andξ∗′
nn = 1
for alln) to the observed equilibrium in the 1830s (with slavery investments and 0<ξ∗
nn < 1 for somen).
We next turn to the aggregate and distributional consequences of access to slavery invest-
ments. In the /f_irst column of Table 4, we report percentage changes in aggregate income,
capitalist income, landlord income and worker welfare from the counterfactual equilibrium
with prohibitive colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnNt→∞) to the observed equilibrium in 1833.
We /f_ind an increase in the aggregate income of all factors of production (capital, labor and
land) of 3.54 percent. This increase in aggregate income is sizeable relative to conventional
estimates of the welfare gains from international trade (an upper bound of 9 percent for 19th-
century Japan inBernhofen and Brown 2005), particularly as this counterfactual focuses solely
on the mechanism of capital accumulation, holding goods price constant. During the period
1800-30, British GDP per capita was growing at 0.3% per annum according to Crafts (2022).
Therefore, slavery investments increased aggregate income by the equivalent of more than a
decade of growth. We /f_ind that this change in aggregate income involves substantial changes
in the distribution of income across factors of production, with capitalist income rising by 11
percent, and landlord income declining by just under 1 percent. The change in worker wel-
fare is the population-weighted average of the change in the real wage in each location and
equals 3.06 percent, implying substantial welfare gains for domestic free workers from the
enslavement and exploitation of black Africans in colonial plantations.
In the second to fourth columns of Table 4, we show that these aggregate changes mask
39
--- Page 41 ---
Table 4: Aggregate and Distributional Consequences of Access to Slavery Investments
Variable Aggregate <p50 ≥p50<p75 ≥p75
Population Share 1833 100 68.27 8.68 23.04
Population change − -1.97 -0.33 6.47
Aggregate Income change 3.54 -1.58 4.88 40.68
Capitalist Income change 11.11 -2.55 15.52 104.14
Landlord Income change -0.87 -0.08 -1.96 -7.18
Worker Welfare change 3.06 3.06 3.06 3.06
Note: Slavery income share is the share of the /f_low income from slavery capital in the /f_low income from all capital
and land; Changes are from the counterfactual equilibrium with prohibitive colonial /f_inancial frictions (φnNt→
∞) to the observed equilibrium in 1833; Population change is the percent change in population; Aggregate income
change is the percent change in the aggregate income of all factors of production; Capital income change is the
percent change in capitalist income from slavery and domestic investments; Landlord income change is the
percent change in landlord income; Worker welfare is the expected utility of the domestic workers, as de/f_ined
in equation (7); Aggregate column reports values for the aggregate economy; <p50 column reports aggregate
values for locations with slavery investment shares (ξnN) less than the median across those locations with positive
shares;≥p50<p75 column reports aggregate values for locations with slavery investment shares (ξnN) from the
50-75th percentiles across locations with positive shares; ≥p75 column reports aggregate values for locations
with slavery investment shares (ξnN) above the 75th percentile across locations with positive shares.
substantial distributional consequences across geographical locations, depending on their par-
ticipation in slavery investments. We divide locations into three groups: those with slavery
investment shares (ξ∗
nN) less than the median across locations with positive values for slavery
investment (68 percent of the 1833 population); locations with slavery investment shares from
the 50-75th percentiles of these positive values (just under 9 percent of the 1833 population);
and locations with slavery investment shares above the 75th percentile of these positive val-
ues (23 percent of the 1833 population).35 For locations with the least participation in slavery
investments, we see a decline in aggregate income of -1.58 percent, a fall of population of 1.97
percent, a drop in capitalist income of 2.55 percent, and little change in landlord income, as
economic activity reallocates towards locations with greater participation in slavery invest-
ments. In contrast, for locations with the greatest participation in slavery investments, we /f_ind
an increase in aggregate income of more than 40 percent, a rise in population of 6.47 percent,
a growth in capitalist income of more than 100 percent, and a decline in landlord income of
7.18 percent. Since labor is mobile across locations, workers in all three groups of locations
experience the same increase in welfare of 3.06 percent.
Therefore, we /f_ind sizeable aggregate eﬀects on access to slavery investments on income
and welfare and the distribution of income across factors of production. Additionally, our re-
sults highlight the uneven impact of slavery investments on the geography of the industrial
revolution within Britain, consistent with our causal estimates using quasi-experimental varia-
35The median slavery investment share (ξ∗
nN) for locations with positive slavery investment is 3.55 percent.
40
--- Page 42 ---
tion above. Locations with better access to slavery investments experience greater expansions
in economic activity, structural transformation away from agriculture, and redistributions of
income away from landlords and towards capitalists.
8 Conclusion
Before Europe’s contact with the Americas, and its heavy involvement in the traﬃcking of en-
slaved Africans to the new colonies, the continent was an also-ran in economic terms. Growth
accelerated as Atlantic trade increased (Acemoglu et al. 2005), and all the more so in the coun-
tries that played a leading role in the trans-Atlantic slave trade. A number of historians have
argued that Britain accumulated great wealth from the slave trade, colonial plantations, and
the wider triangular trade to which these gave rise (Williams 1944). In contrast, most quan-
titative assessments of this argument by economic historians have remained sceptical of this
view, pointing out that the pro/f_its from the slave trade were not particularly high (Eltis and
Engerman 2000).
In this paper, we argue that it was not slave-trading as much as slave-holding that con-
tributed to Britain’s Industrial Revolution. The most optimistic estimates of slave trading
pro/f_its are in the range of 0.5% of GDP in the late 18th century; for slave-holding, the estimate
is closer to 5% (Solow 1993). We develop a spatial general equilibrium model that formalizes
the role of slavery wealth in economic development. Greater access to slavery investments
raises the productivity of the investment technology, which stimulates capital accumulation
and increases the steady-state capital stock. Additionally, slavery investments can readily be
collateralized, alleviating /f_inancing constraints, and again stimulating domestic capital accu-
mulation. In the presence of /f_inancial frictions, the greater capital stock is disproportionately
invested locally, which in turn accelerates local economic growth and structural transforma-
tion towards capital-intensive manufacturing.
For identi/f_ication, we use the eﬀect of weather on sailing time, enslaved mortality, and sur-
vival in the slave trade. Shipping enslaved Africans to the Americas took time, and conditions
on board the ships were horri/f_ic. When passages took too long, mortality increased sharply.
We show that shocks to enslaved mortality aﬀected participation in the slave trade, and in
turn, the slave-holding of slave traders’ descendants in 1833. Using this source of exogenous
variation, we /f_ind that greater slavery wealth promoted local economic growth and led to a
reallocation of economic activity away from agriculture, and towards manufacturing, the dif-
fusion of new manufacturing technology (cotton mills), and the adoption of steam power –
the key new technology of the Industrial Revolution.
We use our theoretical model to quantify the aggregate and distributional consequences of
41
--- Page 43 ---
access to slavery investments. At the aggregate level, we /f_ind an increase in national income
of 3.5 percent. Capitalists were the largest bene/f_iciaries with an increase in their aggregate
income of 11 percent, with landowners experiencing small aggregate income losses of just
under 1 percent. Whereas previous research has largely focused on these aggregate eﬀects,
our work emphasizes the uneven impact of access to slavery investments on the geography of
the industrial revolution. Locations with the greatest levels of participation in slavery invest-
ment experience increases in total income of more than 40 percent, with capitalists’ income
increasing by more than 100 percent, and landlords’ income declining by around 7 percent.
Domestic workers’ welfare increases by around 3 percent from the enslavement and exploita-
tion of black Africans in colonial plantations. In combination, our results strongly suggest that
slavery wealth contributed causally to Britain’s Industrial Revolution, accelerating growth and
facilitating the escape from Malthusian constraints.
References
A/c.sc/e.sc/m.sc/o.sc/g.sc/l.sc/u.sc, D., S. J/o.sc/h.sc/n.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc J. R/o.sc/b.sc/i.sc/n.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc(2005): “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
Institutional Change, and Economic Growth, ”American Economic Review, 95, 546–579.
A/n.sc/g.sc/r.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc, J. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc A. B. K/r.sc/u.sc/e.sc/g.sc/e.sc/r.sc(1994): “Why do World War II Veterans Earn More than Non-
veterans?” Journal of Labor Economics, 12, 74–97.
A/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/k.sc, J., F. B/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc/m.sc/a.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc R. A. M/a.sc/r.sc/g.sc/o.sc(2008): “Steam Power, Establishment Size, and La-
bor Productivity Growth in Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing, ”Explorations in
Economic History, 45, 185–198.
B/a.sc/r.sc/r.sc/o.sc, R. J.(1987): “Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices, and Budget De/f_icits in the
United Kingdom, 1701–1918, ”Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, 221–247.
B/e.sc/l.sc/l.sc/e.sc/m.sc/a.sc/r.sc/e.sc, M. F. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc C. J. W/i.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/a.sc/n.sc(2020): “Elasticities and the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
Transformation, ”Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 82, 50–61.
B/e.sc/r.sc/n.sc/h.sc/o.sc/f.sc/e.sc/n.sc, D. M. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc J. C. B/r.sc/o.sc/w.sc/n.sc(2005): “An Empirical Assessment of the Comparative
Advantage Gains from Trade: Evidence from Japan, ” American Economic Review, 95, 208–
225.
B/l.sc/e.sc/a.sc/k.sc/l.sc/e.sc/y.sc, H. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc P. W. R/h.sc/o.sc/d.sc/e.sc(2021): “The Economic Eﬀects of American Slavery, Redux:
Tests at the Border, ” University of Michigan, mimeograph.
B/o.sc/u.sc/n.sc/d.sc, J. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc D. A. J/a.sc/e.sc/g.sc/e.sc/r.sc(2000): “Do Compulsory School Attendance Laws Alone Explain
the Association between Quarter of Birth and Earnings?” in Research in labor economics,
Emerald Group Publishing Limited, vol. 19, 83–108.
B/r.sc/o.sc/a.sc/d.sc/b.sc/e.sc/r.sc/r.sc/y.sc, S. N., B. M. C/a.sc/m.sc/p.sc/b.sc/e.sc/l.sc/l.sc, A. K/l.sc/e.sc/i.sc/n.sc, M. O/v.sc/e.sc/r.sc/t.sc/o.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc B. /v.sc. L/e.sc/e.sc/u.sc/w.sc/e.sc/n.sc(2010): British
economic growth: 1270-1870, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
B/r.sc/y.sc/a.sc/n.sc, G. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc M. M/o.sc/r.sc/t.sc/e.sc/n.sc(2019): “The Aggregate Productivity Eﬀects of Internal Migration:
Evidence from Indonesia, ”Journal of Political Economy, 127, 2229–2268.
B/u.sc/s.sc/t.sc/o.sc/s.sc, P., B. C/a.sc/p.sc/r.sc/e.sc/t.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/i.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc J. P/o.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/c.sc/e.sc/l.sc/l.sc/i.sc(2016): “Agricultural Productivity and Structural
Transformation: Evidence from Brazil, ”American Economic Review, 106, 1320–65.
C/a.sc/m.sc/p.sc/b.sc/e.sc/l.sc/l.sc, B. M. S. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc K. B/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc/l.sc/e.sc/y.sc(2006): England on the Eve of the Black Death: An Atlas of
Lay Lordship, Land and Wealth 1300-49, Manchester: Manchester University Press.
C/a.sc/p.sc/r.sc/e.sc/t.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/i.sc, B. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc H./hyphen.scJ. V/o.sc/t.sc/h.sc(2020): “Rage Against the Machines: Labor-saving Technology
and Unrest in Industrializing England, ”American Economic Review: Insights, 2, 305–20.
42
--- Page 44 ---
C/a.sc/r.sc/r.sc, D. B. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc L. W. P/i.sc/c.sc/k.sc/l.sc/e.sc(2010): Visualizing Data Patterns with Micromaps, London: Chap-
man and Hall.
C/a.sc/s.sc/e.sc/l.sc/l.sc/i.sc, F. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc W. J. C/o.sc/l.sc/e.sc/m.sc/a.sc/n.sc(2001): “The U.S. structural transformation and regional con-
vergence: A reinterpretation, ”Journal of Political Economy, 109, 584–616.
C/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/m.sc/a.sc/n.sc, S. D.(1981): “The Arkwright Mills− Colquhoun’s Census of 1788 and Archaeolog-
ical Evidence, ”Industrial Archaeology Review, 6, 5–27.
C/h.sc/e.sc/s.sc/h.sc/i.sc/r.sc/e.sc, J. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc P. L/o.sc/n.sc/g.sc/l.sc/e.sc/y.sc(2011): “Spatial concentrations of surnames in Great Britain, ”Pro-
cedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 21, 279–286, international Conference: Spatial Think-
ing and Geographic Information Sciences 2011.
C/o.sc/h.sc/n.sc, R. L. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc R. A. J/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc/n.sc(1982): “The Determinants of Slave Mortality Rates on the Middle
Passage, ”Explorations in Economic History, 19, 269–282.
C/o.sc/n.sc/l.sc/e.sc/y.sc, T.(1999): “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence, ”Journal of Econometrics,
92, 1–45.
C/r.sc/a.sc/f.sc/t.sc/s.sc, N.(1985): British Economic Growth During the Industrial Revolution, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
——— (2022): “Slow Wage Growth During the Industrial Revolution: Productivity Paradox or
Pro-rich Growth?” Oxford Economic Papers, 74, 1–13.
C/r.sc/a.sc/f.sc/t.sc/s.sc, N. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc N. W/o.sc/l.sc/f.sc(2014): “The Location of the UK Cotton Textiles Industry in 1838: A
Quantitative Analysis, ”Journal of Economic History, 74, 1103–1139.
D/a.sc/r.sc/i.sc/t.sc/y.sc, W.(1990): “British Industry and the West Indies Plantations, ” Social Science History,
14, 117–149.
D/e.sc/a.sc/n.sc/e.sc, P. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc W. A. C/o.sc/l.sc/e.sc(1967): British Economic Growth 1688-1959: Trends and Structure,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
D/e.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/o.sc/n.sc/c.sc/o.sc/u.sc/r.sc/t.sc, E.(2019): “Atlantic slavery’s Impact on European and British Economic de-
velopment, ” Princeton University, mimeograph.
D/r.sc/e.sc/s.sc/c.sc/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc, S.(2010): Econocide: British Slavery in the Era of Abolition, Univ of North Carolina
Press.
D’H/a.sc/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc/f.sc/oe.sc/u.sc/i.sc/l.sc/l.sc/e.sc, X., S. H/o.sc/d.sc/e.sc/r.sc/l.sc/e.sc/i.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc Y. S/a.sc/s.sc/a.sc/k.sc/i.sc(2022): “Testing and Relaxing the Exclusion
Restriction in the Control Function Approach, ”Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
E/l.sc/t.sc/i.sc/s.sc, D.(1984): “Mortality and Voyage Length in the Middle Passage: New Evidence from the
Nineteenth Century, ”The Journal of Economic History, 44, 301–308.
E/l.sc/t.sc/i.sc/s.sc, D. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc S. L. E/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc/r.sc/m.sc/a.sc/n.sc(2000): “The Importance of Slavery and the Slave Trade to
Industrializing Britain, ”Journal of Economic History, 123–144.
E/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc/r.sc/m.sc/a.sc/n.sc, S. L.(1972): “The Slave Trade and British Capital Formation in the Eighteenth
Century: A Comment on the Williams Thesis, ”The Business History Review, 430–443.
E/q.sc_u.sc/i.sc/a.sc/n.sc/o.sc, O.(1789): The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano or Gustavus Vassa,
The African, London: Aldermanbury.
F/a.sc/j.sc/g.sc/e.sc/l.sc/b.sc/a.sc/u.sc/m.sc, P. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc S. R/e.sc/d.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc(2022): “Trade, Structural Transformation and Development:
Evidence from Argentina 1869-1914, ”Journal of Political Economy, 130, 1249–1318.
F/e.sc/i.sc/n.sc/s.sc/t.sc/e.sc/i.sc/n.sc, C. H.(1972): National Income, Expenditure and Output of the United Kingdom 1855-
1965, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
F/i.sc/n.sc/d.sc/l.sc/a.sc/y.sc, R.(1990): The "Triangular Trade" and the Atlantic Economy of the Eighteenth Cen-
tury: A Simple General-equilibrium Model, International Finance Section, Department of
Economics, Princeton University.
F/o.sc/x.sc, W. R. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc G. W. L/a.sc/s.sc/k.sc/e.sc/r.sc(1983): “The Distribution of Surname Frequencies, ”International
Statistical Review / Revue Internationale de Statistique, 51, 81–87.
F/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/i.sc/s.sc, J. A.(2021): “King Cotton, the Muni/f_icent: Slavery and (Under)development in the
United States, 1789-1865, ” www.joefrancis.info.
F/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/k.sc, A. G.(1967): Capitalism and Underdevelopment in Latin America, vol. 16, NYU Press.
——— (2011): World Accumulation, NYU Press.
43
--- Page 45 ---
G/a.sc/l.sc/l.sc/e.sc, S., M. Y/i.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc A. R/o.sc/d.sc/r.sc/i.sc/g.sc/u.sc/e.sc/z.sc/hyphen.scC/l.sc/a.sc/r.sc/e.sc(2020): “Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggregate
and Distributional Consequences of Trade, ” University of California, Berkeley, mimeograph.
G/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/c.sc/h.sc/e.sc/n.sc/k.sc/r.sc/o.sc/n.sc, A.(1962): “Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (1962), ” The
Political Economy Reader: Markets as Institutions, 211–228.
G/i.sc/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc, D. E.(1992): A Measure of Wealth: The English Land Tax in Historical Analysis, Québec:
McGill-Queen’s University Press.
G/l.sc/a.sc/s.sc/s.sc/c.sc/o.sc/c.sc/k.sc, R. E.(1974): The Lay Subsidy of 1334, London: Oxford University Press.
G/o.sc/l.sc/l.sc/i.sc/n.sc, D., R. J/e.sc/d.sc/w.sc/a.sc/b.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc D. V/o.sc/l.sc/l.sc/r.sc/a.sc/t.sc/h.sc(2016): “Urbanization With and Without Industrial-
ization, ”Journal of Economic Growth, 21, 35–70.
G/o.sc/n.sc/z.sc/aacute.sc/l.sc/e.sc/z.sc, F., G. M/a.sc/r.sc/s.sc/h.sc/a.sc/l.sc/l.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc S. N/a.sc/i.sc/d.sc/u.sc(2017): “Start-up Nation? Slave Wealth and En-
trepreneurship in Civil War Maryland, ”Journal of Economic History, 77, 373–405.
G/u.sc/i.sc/s.sc/o.sc, L., P. S/a.sc/p.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/z.sc/a.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc L. Z/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc/a.sc/l.sc/e.sc/s.sc(2004): “Does Local Financial Development Matter?”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 929–969.
G/udieresis.sc/e.sc/l.sc/l.sc, M., J. V. R/o.sc/d.sc/r.sc/iacute.sc/g.sc/u.sc/e.sc/z.sc M/o.sc/r.sc/a.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc C. I. T/e.sc/l.sc/m.sc/e.sc/r.sc(2014): “The Informational Content of
Surnames, the Evolution of Intergenerational Mobility, and Assortative Mating, ”The Review
of Economic Studies, 82, 693–735.
H/a.sc/i.sc/n.sc/e.sc/s.sc, R., J. M/c.scD/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc/d.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc R. S/h.sc/l.sc/o.sc/m.sc/o.sc/w.sc/i.sc/t.sc/z.sc(2001): “Mortality and Voyage Length in the
Middle Passage Revisited, ”Explorations in Economic History, 38, 503–533.
H/a.sc/l.sc/l.sc, C., N. D/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc, K. M/c.scC/l.sc/e.sc/l.sc/l.sc/a.sc/n.sc/d.sc, K. D/o.sc/n.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc/t.sc/o.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc R. L/a.sc/n.sc/g.sc(2014): Legacies of British
Slave-ownership: Colonial Slavery and the Formation of Victorian Britain, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
H/e.sc/b.sc/l.sc/i.sc/c.sc/h.sc, S. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc A. T/r.sc/e.sc/w.sc(2019): “Banking and Industrialization, ” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 17, 1753–96.
H/e.sc/r.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/d.sc/o.sc/r.sc/f.sc, B., R. R/o.sc/g.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc Á. V /a.sc/l.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/y.sc/i.sc(2012): “Two Perspectives on Preferences
and Structural Transformation, ”American Economic Review, 103, 2752–89.
H/o.sc/u.sc/s.sc/e.sc /o.sc/f.sc C/o.sc/m.sc/m.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc(1839): “Return of All the Mills and Factories, ” British Parliamentary
Papers.
——— (1844): “Return Showing the Annual Value of Real Property in each Parish of Each Coun-
try in England and Wales Assessed to the Property and Income Tax for the Year Ended 1843
and the Quota of Land Tax Assessed in each Parish for the Year 1798, ” British Parliamentary
Papers.
I/t.sc/s.sc/k.sc/h.sc/o.sc/k.sc/i.sc, O. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc B. M/o.sc/l.sc/l.sc(2019): “Optimal Development Policies with Financial Frictions, ”
Econometrica, 87, 139–173.
K/i.sc/p.sc/l.sc/e.sc, K. F. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc B. T. H/i.sc/g.sc/g.sc/i.sc/n.sc/s.sc(1989): “Mortality Caused by Dehydration during the Middle
Passage, ”Social Science History, 13, 421–437.
K/l.sc/e.sc/i.sc/n.sc G/o.sc/l.sc/d.sc/e.sc/w.sc/i.sc/j.sc/k.sc, K., A. B/e.sc/u.sc/s.sc/e.sc/n.sc, J. D/o.sc/e.sc/l.sc/m.sc/a.sc/n.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc E. S/t.sc/e.sc/h.sc/f.sc/e.sc/s.sc/t.sc(2017): “Anthropogenic land
use estimates for the Holocene – HYDE 3.2, ”Earth System Science Data, 9, 927–953.
K/o.sc/i.sc/j.sc/e.sc/n.sc, R. S. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc M. Y/o.sc/g.sc/o.sc(2019): “A Demand System Approach to Asset Pricing, ”Journal of
Political Economy, 127, 1475–1515.
——— (2020): “Exchange Rates and Asset Prices in a Global Demand System, ” NBER Working
Paper, 27342.
L/i.sc/u.sc, E., S. J. R/e.sc/d.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc M. Y/o.sc/g.sc/o.sc(2022): “The Geography of Global Trade and Investment, ”
Princeton University, mimeograph.
L/u.sc/c.sc/a.sc/s.sc, R.(2002): Lectures on Economic Growth, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
M/a.sc/r.sc/x.sc, K.(1867): Das Kapital, Verlag Otto Meissner.
M/a.sc/t.sc/s.sc/u.sc/y.sc/a.sc/m.sc/a.sc, K.(1992): “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage and Economic
Growth, ”Journal of Economic Theory, 58, 317–334.
M/o.sc/l.sc/l.sc, B.(2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: can Self-/f_inancing undo Capital
Misallocation?” American Economic Review, 104, 3186–3221.
N/g.sc/a.sc/i.sc, L. R. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc C. A. P/i.sc/s.sc/s.sc/a.sc/r.sc/i.sc/d.sc/e.sc/s.sc(2007): “Structural Change in a Multisector Model of growth, ”
44
--- Page 46 ---
American Economic Review, 97, 429–443.
N/u.sc/n.sc/n.sc, N.(2008): “The Long-term Eﬀects of Africa’s Slave Trades, ” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 123, 139–176.
N/u.sc/n.sc/n.sc, N. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc L. W /a.sc/n.sc/t.sc/c.sc/h.sc/e.sc/k.sc/o.sc/n.sc(2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa, ”
American Economic Review, 101, 3221–3252.
P/a.sc/s.sc/c.sc/a.sc/l.sc/i.sc, L.(2017): “The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade, and Economic Devel-
opment, ”American Economic Review, 107, 2821–54.
PASE (2010): “Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England, ” http://www.pase.ac.uk.
P/e.sc/b.sc/r.sc/e.sc/r.sc, P.(1833): Taxation, Revenue, Expenditure, Power, Statistics, and Debt of the Whole
British Empire, London: Baldwin and Cradock.
P/r.sc/i.sc/c.sc/e.sc, G. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc W. W/h.sc/a.sc/t.sc/l.sc/e.sc/y.sc(2020): “Did Pro/f_itable Slave Trading Enable the Expansion of
Empire? The Asiento de Negros, the South Sea Company and the Financial Revolution, ”
Cliometrica, 1–44.
R/a.sc/g.sc/a.sc/t.sc/z.sc, L. J.(1928): The Fall of the Planter Class in the British Caribbean, 1763-1833, The Cen-
tury Co.
R/o.sc/s.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/h.sc/a.sc/l.sc, C.(2018): Accounting for Slavery: Masters and Management, Cambridge MA: Har-
vard University Press.
S/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/i.sc/d.sc/a.sc/n.sc, R. B.(1965): “Wealth of Jamaica in the Eighteenth Century, ”Economic History Re-
view, 18, 292–311.
S/o.sc/l.sc/o.sc/w.sc, B. L.(1993): Slavery and the Rise of the Atlantic System, vol. 1, Cambridge University
Press.
S/o.sc/u.sc/t.sc/h.sc/a.sc/l.sc/l.sc, H. R., P. E/l.sc/l.sc, D. A. G/a.sc/t.sc/l.sc/e.sc/y.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc I. G/r.sc/e.sc/g.sc/o.sc/r.sc/y.sc(2004): “Great Britain Historical
Database: Census Data: Parish-Level Population Statistics, 1801-1951, ” Colchester, Essex:
UK Data Archive.
S/t.sc/e.sc/p.sc/h.sc/e.sc/n.sc, J.(1824): The Slavery of the British West India Colonies Delineated: Being a Delineation
of the State in Point of Law, vol. 1, J. Butterworth and Son.
T/a.sc/y.sc/l.sc/o.sc/r.sc, M.(2020): The Interest: How the British Establishment Resisted the Abolition of Slavery ,
London: Bodley Head.
T/h.sc/o.sc/m.sc/a.sc/s.sc, R. P. /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc R. N. B/e.sc/a.sc/n.sc(1974): “The Fishers of Men: The Pro/f_its of the Slave Trade, ”
The Journal of Economic History, 885–914.
U/y.sc, T., K./hyphen.scM. Y/i.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc J. Z/h.sc/a.sc/n.sc/g.sc(2012): “Structural Change in an Open Economy, ” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 60, 667–82.
W /a.sc/l.sc/l.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/t.sc/e.sc/i.sc/n.sc, I. M.(2004): World-systems analysis: An introduction, Duke University Press.
W /a.sc/r.sc/d.sc, J. R.(1978): “The Pro/f_itability of Sugar Planting in the British West Indies, 1650-1834, ”
The Economic History Review, 31, 197–213, publisher: JSTOR.
W/i.sc/l.sc/l.sc/i.sc/a.sc/m.sc/s.sc, E.(1944): Capitalism and Slavery, UNC Press Books.
W/r.sc/i.sc/g.sc/h.sc/t.sc, G.(2006): Slavery and American Economic Development, LSU Press.
W/r.sc/i.sc/g.sc/l.sc/e.sc/y.sc, E. A.(2011): The Early English Censuses, Oxford University Press.
45