
--- Page 1 ---
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY OF AMERICAN SLAVERY
Treb Allen
Winston Chen
Suresh Naidu
Working Paper 34356
http://www.nber.org/papers/w34356
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2025
We have no disclosures to report. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2025 by Treb Allen, Winston Chen, and Suresh Naidu. All rights reserved. Short sections of 
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full 
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
--- Page 2 ---
The Economic Geography of American Slavery 
Treb Allen, Winston Chen, and Suresh Naidu 
NBER Working Paper No. 34356
October 2025
JEL No. J47, N51, O17, R1
ABSTRACT
What would the antebellum American economy have looked like without slavery? Using new 
micro-data on 
the U.S. economy in 1860, we document that where free and enslaved workers live 
and how much they earn correlates strongly—but differently—with geographic proxies for 
agricultural productivity, disease, and ease of slave escape. To explain these patterns, we build a 
quantitative spatial model of slavery, where slaveholders coerce enslaved workers into supplying 
more labor, capture the proceeds of their labor, and assign them to sectors and occupations that 
maximize owner profits rather than worker welfare. Combining theory and data, we then quantify 
how dismantling the institution of slavery affected the spatial economy. We find that the economic 
impacts of emancipation are substantial, generating  welfare gains for the enslaved of roughly 
1,200%, while reducing welfare of free workers by 0.7% and eliminating slaveholder 
profit. Aggregate GDP rises by 9.1%, with a contraction in agricultural  productivity 
counteracted by an expansion in manufacturing and services driven by an exodus of formerly  
enslaved workers out of agriculture and into the U.S. North.
Treb Allen
Dartmouth College 
Department of Economics 
and NBER
treb@dartmouth.edu
Winston Chen
Yale University 
winston.chen@yale.edu
Suresh Naidu
Columbia University
and NBER
sn2430@columbia.edu
--- Page 3 ---
1 Introduction
American racial slavery legally enforced restrictions on Black labor and life. Scholars have
long debated whether enslaved labor fundamentally altered the antebellum U.S. economy,
broadly focusing on three key characteristics of the institution: (1) slaveholders coerced en-
slaved workers to work harder than they would have otherwise chosen (Fogel and Engerman,
1974; Ransom and Sutch, 1977); (2) slaveholders captured the proceeds of enslaved work-
ers’ labor (David and Temin, 1974; Darity and Mullen, 2020); and (3) slaveholders assigned
enslaved workers to locations and sectors that they may not have otherwise chosen (Fleisig,
1976; Wright, 2006). Given the size of the institution—a full third of the U.S. Southern
population was enslaved—these restrictions not only had large direct impacts on enslaved
labor but also likely had large indirect impacts on prices, wages, and the allocations of free
labor. Quantifying the economic impacts of slavery then requires a comprehensive analysis
of the economy as a whole, incorporating the key margins of labor supply controlled by
slaveowners as well as the myriad ways in which free and enslaved labor interacts across
sectors and space.
In this paper, we undertake a general equilibrium analysis quantifying how slavery shaped
the spatial economy of the antebellum U.S. We first build a rich database of the antebellum
U.S. economy to document that where enslaved and free people lived and how much value
their labor generated correlates strongly—but in different ways—with geographic factors. To
explain these patterns, we then develop a model of slavery that incorporates the three aspects
of slavery highlighted by previous scholars—coercion, markdowns, and misallocation—into
a many-location, many-sector general equilibrium model of the U.S. economy. The model is
built on the assumption that—were it not for the institution of slavery—free and enslaved
workers would act identically and the economy would be efficient, providing a natural bench-
mark for the effect of property rights in other people’s labor. Combining theory and data, we
then quantify the impacts of slavery. We find that complete emancipation has large effects
on the U.S. economy, inducing an expansion of manufacturing (26.5%) and services (21.0%)
and a contraction of agriculture (-5.4%). The welfare of formerly enslaved workers increases
by almost 1,200%, whereas free worker welfare declines 0.7% and slaveholders’ profits are
erased. Finally, we show that the counterfactual changes in labor allocations from emancipa-
tion are strongly correlated with observed patterns of White and Black reallocations across
all sectors following the Civil War, although the comparison offers suggestive evidence of
substantial migration frictions for recently emancipated Black workers.
We first assemble a comprehensive dataset of the spatial and sectoral distribution of eco-
nomic activity in the U.S. in the year 1860. Combining the 100% count U.S. free census
2
--- Page 4 ---
(Ruggles et al., 2024, 2025) with the newly digitized 100% count U.S. slave census (Hacker
et al., 2025), we calculate the number of free and enslaved workers employed in each sec-
tor (agriculture, manufacturing, and services) in every U.S. county. This same linking also
provides a proxy for slave prices at the county-sector level using the observed slave-holders’
personal property per enslaved person, which we show correlates as expected with the de-
mographic composition of the enslaved persons owned. To measure economic output, we
use three additional datasets: the Census Social Statistics (compiled by Robert Margo, Paul
Rhode and John Clegg), the Agricultural and Manufacturing Censuses (Haines et al., 2010;
Hornbeck and Rotemberg, 2024), and the U.S. Army Fort quartermaster records (Margo,
2009; Margo and Villaflor, 1987). Combining the first two datasets allows us to construct
measures of the wages of workers (including incomes of farmers) in each sector in each U.S.
county, which we show correlates strongly with the spatial variation in literacy of (free)
workers employed in these sector. The quartermaster records allow us to obtain new esti-
mates of the differential compensation paid to enslaved workers, augmenting a longstanding
approach of comparing within-occupation slave hire rates with free worker wages (Lindert
and Williamson, 2012; Engerman, 1973) by controlling for detailed occupation, year, and
fort fixed effects.
We proceed by documenting three stylized facts. First, we show that free and enslaved
workers are differentially allocated across space. While both free and enslaved workers tend
to live in more productive locations (as proxied by agro-climatic cotton suitability), free
workers are more likely to live in higher amenity locations (as proxied by lower malarial
agro-climatic suitability), whereas enslaved workers are less likely live in such locations.
Similarly, free workers sort into locations with less coercion (as proxied by the distance to
the northern border), whereas enslaved workers are sorted into locations with more coercion.
Second, we show that similar patterns exist across sectors within locations: for example, free
workers are less likely to be employed in agriculture in areas with greater malaria, whereas
enslaved workers are more likely to be employed in agriculture in such areas. Third, we show
that the spatial patterns of wages and slave prices also exhibit distinct geographic patterns.
For example, free worker wages are lower in locations with higher amenities, whereas slave
prices are higher in such locations.
Next, we develop a new micro-founded spatial model of slavery. The premise of the
model is straightforward: unlike free workers who choose where to live, what to do, and how
hard to work in order to maximize their own welfare, enslaved workers are not afforded such
choice. Instead, slaveholders assign them a location and job and coerce their effort in order
to maximize profits. The model not only offers explanations for the stylized facts, it also
highlights three distinct margins through which slavery reduces the welfare of the enslaved:
3
--- Page 5 ---
first, enslaved workers are coerced to provide greater labor supply than they would have
themselves chosen; second, slaveholders capture the proceeds of the enslaved labor, optimally
marking-down enslaved workers’ compensation in order to maximize their own profits; third,
slaveholders assign the enslaved to locations and occupations that have lower amenities and
a higher capacities for coercion than they would have chosen on their own. We derive partial
equilibrium expressions for the welfare costs of each of these margins as functions of model
parameters and the underlying geography.
In general equilibrium, however, the sectoral and geographic reallocation of newly eman-
cipated workers will alter the prices for the outputs of different places and induce reallocation
of the already free population, which can have complex effects on both the welfare of the
newly emancipated as well as the already free. For example, if enslaved workers are (as we
find) disproportionately located in remote, disease-ridden locations, then emancipation will
result in them leaving such locations. But this will drive down wages in more attractive
locations and drive up wages in those sectors and locations where the recently emancipated
depart, causing the free population to reallocate as well. The incidence of these wage and
price changes will be propagated throughout the economy (depending on e.g. the trade costs
between slave-intensive areas and other population centers). As another example, enslaved
workers will be disproportionately located in agriculture far from free states (to deter fugi-
tives as in Allen (2015)) in order to more easily coerce enslaved labor. With emancipation,
those workers will be free to move to more productive manufacturing or agricultural sectors
in locations closer to the North. The incidence of the resulting wage and price changes will
again be propagated throughout the economy. Quantifying these complex effects is the task
we set our model to.
In order to do so, we begin by estimating three model parameters that the model high-
lights are crucial for the welfare implications of slavery: the intensive labor supply elasticity
within sector, the extensive labor supply elasticity across sectors, and the extensive labor
supply elasticity across locations. The intensive labor supply within sector determines the
optimal markdown, which we estimate using the U.S. Army forts data, comparing the pay-
ments made to free and enslaved workers for doing the same task at the same U.S. Army
fort. The quartermaster reports have payments made to slave owners, and we present evi-
dence that these payments are net of subsistence expenses directly borne by the fort, so the
18% penalty we estimate for hired slave workers reflects slave owners appropriating 82% of
the marginal product. This implies an intensive labor supply elasticity of 0.22, well within
the range of contemporary estimates and consistent with historical estimates of enslaved
worker subsistence baskets. To estimate the extensive labor supply elasticities across sectors
and locations, we compare the relative wages and slave prices within a county-sector to the
4
--- Page 6 ---
relative free and enslaved labor shares, instrumenting relative shares with amenity proxies,
as suggested by the model. The resulting extensive supply elasticities—3.3 across locations
and 2.5 across sectors—are comparable to those estimated in other settings.
Given these parameters, we then use the detailed spatial data on labor allocations and
output to “invert” the model to recover the underlying productivities, amenities, and degree
of coercion of each location-sector. We show that these recovered productivities, amenities,
and coercion parameters correlate well with the proxies we employed in the stylized facts. We
then simulate a series of counterfactuals that dismantle the institution of slavery to estimate
the welfare and spatial economic impacts for both free and enslaved workers. Unsurprisingly,
we find that removing the institution of slavery leads to substantial welfare gains for enslaved
workers. In equivalent variation terms, slaveowners would have to pay an enslaved worker
1,192% more to get voluntary consent to the allocation of labor induced under slavery. As
we cannot account for level shifts in utility that differ between all free and all enslaved, e.g.
physical protection from violence and abuse or psychic costs and benefits of standing and
status, these welfare gains ought to be seen as a lower bound. Each of the three sources of
misallocation play an important role: allowing enslaved individuals to choose their own labor
supply while remaining in slavery (i.e. removing coercion) yields a welfare gain equivalent
to a 361% increase in wages; allowing enslaved workers to retain all of their earnings yields
a welfare gain equivalent to a further 81% wage increase; and allowing enslaved workers
to choose any occupation in any location in the U.S. (so that they act identically to free
workers) leads to a welfare gain equivalent to a 55% wage increase. Conversely, emancipation
causes the welfare of free workers to decline by 0.7%, as the reallocation of the formerly
enslaved drives down equilibrium wages in more attractive locations and sectors. These
results highlight that even restricting the accounting of slavery to neoclassical labor supply
margins and omitting many plausible economic externalities and non-pecuniary dimensions
of racial domination and servitude still yields very large welfare impacts.1
Emancipation also has large general equilibrium impacts on the economy. The movement
of formerly enslaved workers out of agriculture causes services and manufacturing sectors to
expand: for example, manufacturing output increases by 29% in the North, 19% in the
South, and 27% overall. Agriculture expands in the U.S. North by 24%, but contracts in the
U.S. South by 29%, for a modest decline of 5.4% overall. All told, aggregate GDP rises by
1While we are not directly engaged with the large literature on reparations (Darity and Mullen, 2020), one
philosophical and legal perspective on reparations relies on computing counterfactual economic welfare to
measure historical harm (Nozick, 1974; Posner and Vermeule, 2003). We view our estimates of compensation
for unpaid labor in the spirit of Dr. Martin Luther King’s claim “No amount of gold could provide an
adequate compensation for the exploitation and humiliation of the Negro down through the centuries. Not
all the wealth in this affluent society could pay the bill. Yet a price can be placed on unpaid wages.” (King Jr,
2000).
5
--- Page 7 ---
9.1%, with the reallocation of labor toward higher amenity locations offset by a combination
of this structural transformation and the ability of the formerly enslaved to move to the
(more productive) U.S. North.
Finally, we compare our quantitative predictions of the effects of emancipation to the
actual experience in the U.S. South after the Civil War. We show that the patterns of
labor reallocations in the theory—of both Black and White populations across both sectors
and locations—closely matches what occurred in reality. The one exception to this is for
the change in the total Black population across locations, where we only find a positive
correlation after conditioning on the initial antebellum Black population, suggesting that the
post Civil War experience of Black workers may have entailed substantial additional mobility
constraints not captured by our model, for example due to social networks, family ties, Black
Codes, or ongoing racial violence, attenuating the potential gains from emancipation.
The primary contribution of our paper is to construct and estimate a model of the an-
tebellum U.S. economy to quantify the impacts of the institution of slavery. In doing so,
our paper contributes to several strands of literature. Most directly, our paper builds on
the vast literature examining the economics of slavery, a recent survey of which can be
found in Wright (2022). Hornbeck and Logan (2023) calculate welfare gains from eman-
cipation, analogizing slavery to an externality imposed on the enslaved. They employ a
Hulten (1978)-type intuition: starting from a competitive slave economy with no other dis-
tortions, marginal economic benefit from emancipating an enslaved worker is equal to the
difference between what slave owners pay for enslaved labor and the costs borne by those
workers. They then calculate bounds on the missing “compensating differential” using both
value of statistical life estimates as well as data on wages for gang-labor after emancipation.
Our model incorporates this idea into a general equilibrium micro-founded model of slavery,
where slaveholders optimally choose employment and compensation for enslaved workers,
constrained by a coerced labor supply curve. Ultimately, our estimated welfare gains to
enslaved workers from emancipation fall near the center of the range of estimates they re-
port. In a simple, partial equilibrium description, Naidu (2020) suggests that free labor is
monopsonistically competitive, with idiosyncratic tastes for employers, while the enslaved
labor market is closer to perfect competition, implying less allocative inefficiency in the slave
labor market. Bleakley and Rhode (2022) analyze discontinuities at the Mason-Dixon line.
They present evidence that slavery itself was a disamenity for free workers, with the slave
side of the border characterized by low land values, high free wages, and few free whites.
These recent papers contribute to a large economics literature on slavery going back to Con-
rad and Meyer (1958), and we review the relevant work alongside stylized facts in the next
section. Relative to these papers, our approach brings new data and uses recent advances in
6
--- Page 8 ---
quantitative spatial general equilibrium modeling to analyze multiple facets of the institution
of slavery while accounting for the substantial general equilibrium effects the institution had
on the economy.2
Our approach is motivated by the difficulty in forming a convincing counterfactual for
the slave economy. Virtually all of the economics literature on American slavery has implic-
itly or explicitly specified counterfactuals. Beginning with Alexis De Tocqueville comparing
agriculture on the left and right banks of the Ohio River, scholars have examined the spa-
tial discontinuities between slave and free states in the hopes of recovering a counterfactual
in the absence of slavery. However, such local spatial comparisons are intrinsically limited
in their ability to recover the general equilibrium effects of emancipating the third of the
Southern U.S. population that was enslaved. A natural aggregate counterfactual also exists
in the pre/post Civil War comparison. But emancipation after 1860 is confounded by both
the destruction of the Civil War (Feigenbaum et al., 2022) as well as the rapid imposition
of both military Reconstruction (Frieden et al., 2024) and incipient Jim Crow (Althoff and
Reichardt, 2024). Constructing a plausible counterfactual to the antebellum economy re-
quires detailed modeling of the ways in which enslaved and free workers interacted with the
economic geography of comparative advantage in the antebellum US South.
Methodologically, our paper builds on a recent literature on spatial general equilibrium
models, and their application to economic history. Studying the 20th century Black migra-
tion, both Takahashi (2022) and Yang (2024) build quantitative spatial models to quantify
the contribution of the Great Migration of African-Americans to economic growth. Heblich
et al. (2022) use a quantitative trade model to study the contribution of the slave trade to
industrialization in England, emphasizing the role of frictional capital markets. Donaldson
and Hornbeck (2016) study the effects of the 19th century US railroad through the lens
of a spatial equilibrium model, while Allen and Donaldson (2020) study multiple equilibria
in a quantitative dynamic spatial model of the United States back to 1790. A theoretical
contribution of our paper to this literature is to integrate a static spatial general equilibrium
model with the key insight of coercive labor markets highlighted by Acemoglu and Wolitzky
(2011). The study of coercion in labor markets has also received considerable attention,
with recent papers including Bobonis and Morrow (2014); Naidu and Yuchtman (2013);
2A large empirical literature studies long-term persistence of U.S. slavery along multiple dimensions. Ager
et al.(2021) studypersistent effectsof emancipation on slave owners, finding thatslaveowner descendants had
largely converged to non-slaveowner wealth levels by 1900. Althoff and Reichardt (2024) look at individual
intergenerational persistence of slavery, and find that much of the persistent legacy of slavery (compared
to African Americans emancipated before the civil war) can be explained by differential exposure to more
intensive Jim Crow laws in the deep South. Nunn (2007), building on Sokoloff and Engerman (2000), shows
persistent effects of slavery on contemporary economic outcomes in both the U.S. and the New World more
broadly.
7
--- Page 9 ---
Dippel et al. (2020); Saleh (2024); Helper et al. (2025); Miller et al. (2025), but none have
considered spatial heterogeneity in coercion, nor its integration with a quantitative spatial
equilibrium model. A paper that is comparable in terms of estimating short-run impacts
of eliminating coerced labor is Markevich and Zhuravskaya (2018), who study the effects
of serf emancipation in Russia. They find, in a partial equilibrium calculation, that both
agricultural and manufacturing productivity increase in areas differentially affected by the
elimination of serfdom. Finally, we build on the recent literature quantifying misallocation
in labor markets with general equilibrium models of heterogeneous workers, beginning with
Hsieh et al. (2019).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We begin by presenting the data and
three stylized facts. In Section 3, we present a spatial model of slavery, which we then use
to derive analytical expression for the welfare gains from emancipation in Section 4. Section
5 then estimates the key model parameters and quantifies the impacts of emancipation.
Section 6 concludes.
2 Data and Stylized Facts
We motivate our model by documenting a series of stylized facts about the U.S. slave econ-
omy.
2.1 Data
We begin by describing the data sources we use to document these facts.
Free and enslaved worker counts by county×sector: For free persons, we use
the 100% Count 1860 Free Census (Ruggles et al., 2024, 2025). For individuals age 16-50
who report being in the labor force, we use their reported occupation to assign them to
one of three occupational categories (constructed by IPUMS), which we refer to as sectors:
agriculture, professional and personal services (“services”), and manufacturing, mechanical,
and mining industries (“manufacturing”) in each county in the U.S.
For enslaved workers, we use the 100% Count 1860 Slave (schedule 2) Census compiled
by Hacker et al. (2025), who link the enslaved persons to their slaveholders in the Free
Census using a machine learning algorithm based on name and location matching, achiev-
ing over 80 percent match rates (although by construction neglecting matches to absentee
slaveholders). Despite being the most comprehensive data on enslaved workers available, the
slave schedules have many missing entries (e.g. fugitives are underreported), and leave many
8
--- Page 10 ---
details unreported, notably their occupations.3 Our approach, while admittedly imperfect,
is to follow Lockley (2014) and assign all enslaved workers age 16-50 to the sector of their
(co-located) slaveholder. Of the 1.94 million enslaved workers, this procedure yields 1.60
million employed in agriculture, 77,000 employed in manufacturing, and 259,000 employed
in services. In Appendix A.3, we show our aggregate figures are quite close to estimates in
the literature, particularly recent estimates by Rhode (2024), as well as offering additional
validation tests on this assumption.
Wages by county×sector: We use four sources to construct measures of economic
activity: (1) the 1860 Census County Level Social Statistics, digitized by Robert Margo,
Paul Rhode and John Clegg, for wages of free workers by occupation and county;4 (2) the
industry-level manufacturing census data compiled by Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2024); (3)
the 1860 county-level agricultural and manufacturing censuses compiled by Michael Haines;
and (4) the 100% count 1860 free census.
We combine these data sources to estimate the agricultural, services, and manufacturing
wages in each county as follows. For agricultural wages, we take a weighted average of
the observed agricultural wages without board from the Social Statistics data and 5% of
the real property value for farmers for agricultural wages to get farmer incomes from the
100% count free census, where the weight is the share landless among farmers observed in
the free census. For manufacturing wages, we use the observed wages in the industry-level
manufacturing census data, excluding construction and other non-manufacturing industries.
For services, we take the average of the domestic worker and carpenter wages from the Social
Statistics data.
To interpolate wages for sector-locations which are not observed, we predict wage data by
projecting (log) observed wages at observed county×sector level on (log) free and enslaved
worker counts, (log) land area, state fixed effects, and (log) agricultural and manufactur-
ing output. As verification for this procedure, Appendix Figures B.9 and B.10 show that
the resulting county×sector wages correlate strongly and positively with the observed spa-
tial variation in literacy rates and per capita wealth observed in the 100% Free Census,
conditional on state fixed effects.
Payments made to free and enslaved workers for the same jobs:We use the
U.S. Army Fort quartermaster records (Margo, 2009) to observe payments made to both
free and enslaved workers for the same jobs. Slaves were rented for employment in a variety
of occupations on U.S. army forts prior to 1865, doing many tasks alongside free labor.
3AlineofliteratureinAfrican-Americanhistoryandcriticalarchivalstudieshaslookedatwhattraditional
archival sources on slavery, particularly slave censuses, exclude (Hartman, 1997; Fuentes, 2016).
4We thank the authors for sharing these with us.
9
--- Page 11 ---
The historical evidence suggests that the recorded payments from the military are rental
payments made to the slave owner. The virtue of the fort data is that it is all from the
same organization, and allows us to control for occupation, thus comparing wage rates to
enslaved and free workers doing the same job in the same fort. While unrepresentative of
the whole slave economy, the quartermaster reports enable detailed controls for unobserved
heterogeneity, and we discuss them more fully below and in Appendix A.4.
Slave prices by county×sector: Finally, we construct a new proxy of slave prices
that vary at the county×sector level. To do so, we use the linked 100% free and slave
censuses to calculate the slave-holder value of personal estate per enslaved person. Because
the personal estate captures the value of all non real-estate assets of a slaveholder (not
just the value of their slaveholdings), it does not allow us to identify the level of slave
prices. As a result, we only use the measure as a proxy for slave prices in the stylized
facts and estimation that follows (where fixed effects can absorb this missing intercept)
and do not use them directly in the quantitative exercise. However, Appendix Table B.1
reassuringly shows that the proxy correlates as expected with the demographic composition
of slaveholders’ slaveholdings, e.g. slave prices are lower for slaveholders with more elderly or
younger enslaved persons and that there is a slight premium for prime-age female enslaved
persons over prime-age male enslaved persons. Further, Appendix Table B.4 shows, in the
Parker-Gallman sample of linked farm-slave schedules for cotton plantations, that additional
measures of personal property for farmers, such as farm equipment and livestock, are much
more weakly correlated with personal property per slave, and do not alter the demographic
coefficients.
Geography: We construct proxies of the productivity, amenity, and degree of coercion of
slaveholders over enslaved based on the innate geography of each county in the U.S. South.
For a measure of productivity, we consider the (low fertilizer, no irrigation) agroclimatic
cotton suitability of each county as measured by the FAO-GAEZ database (see Fischer
et al. (2021)). Cotton was one of the most important cash crops in the U.S. South; as
panel (a) of Appendix Figure B.1 highlights, there existed substantial spatial heterogeneity
across the U.S. South in how suitable the climate was for production.5 For a measure of
5Recent papers have argued that the FAO-GAEZ measures are poor proxies for historical crop yields
(Rhode, 2024) and rife with measurement error (Araujo and Possebom, 2025). In Appendix Table B.2 we
present a regression table showing that in our sample and specification, all three of an indicator for any
cotton production, the log of cotton yield per county acre (among counties that produce cotton), and the
inverse hyperbolic sine of cotton per county acre are strongly and significantly correlated with our cotton
suitability measure in our baseline specification as well as a specification including quadratic latitude and
longitude controls. We have also confirmed that our stylized facts remain robust whether other proxies are
used, such as cotton over wheat (as in Masera and Rosenberg (2021)) or indices of plantation crop (sugar,
cotton, tobacco, and rice) suitability, with results available on request.
10
--- Page 12 ---
the (dis)amenity of a location, we consider the climatic suitability for malaria as measured
by Kiszewski et al. (2004). Locations with higher incidence of malaria resulted in greater
mortality rates, and Esposito (2022) has previously shown that enslaved persons with greater
resistance to malaria garnered higher prices; panel (b) of Appendix Figure B.1 shows that
warmer and lower elevation areas of the U.S. South were more suitable to malaria. Finally,
to proxy for the degree of coercion a slaveholder has over enslaved workers, we construct
a measure of the distance to the North, as depicted in panel (c) of Appendix Figure B.1.
It was more difficult for enslaved workers to escape from locations further away from the
North, reducing their outside option (see Allen (2015)).
Given the substantial spatial correlation in our proxies evident in Appendix Figure B.1,
thereexiststhepossibilitythatthereareunobservablevariablescorrelatedwithourmeasures.
While our goal is to only provide suggestive evidence of the existence of inefficiencies in the
allocations of enslaved workers rather than causal relationships, to attenuate the concerns
of spurious correlations in the stylized facts that follow we include state fixed effects and
condition each variable on the other two. Appendix Figure B.2 depicts the resulting residual
variation that we use in our empirical exercises below, which exhibits less obvious spatial
correlations.
To validate that our county-specific geographic proxies for productivity, disamenities
(malaria suitability), and coercion (distance to freedom) make sense, we check that they
are correlated with direct measures of economic activity, health, and ease of slave escape.
Panel (a) of Appendix Figure B.3 shows that agricultural revenue and cotton output is
indeed differentially higher in high cotton-suitability counties. Panel (b) shows that malaria
intensity is negatively correlated with the share of old people among free persons. Owing
to either differential mortality or out-migration, elderly individuals are significantly under-
represented in high malaria areas, as would be expected. Panel (b) also uses the individual
mortality census schedules to show that the slave mortality level from malaria, relative to
free, is higher in high malaria areas. Panel (c) shows the share of enslaved workers reported
as fugitives, as well as the reward in fugitive ads relative to the value of the worker, are
both declining in the distance to the North. All of these correlations are conditional on
state fixed effects and the other two geographic proxies and all are statistically significant at
conventional levels, lending credence to their use in the stylized facts that follow.
2.2 Stylized Facts
We now present three stylized facts. The first two focus on quantities, documenting different
patterns of allocations for free and enslaved worker across locations and sectors, respectively.
11
--- Page 13 ---
The third focuses on prices, documenting different patterns of wages for free workers and
slave values for enslaved workers. In the following section, we will show how each of these
stylized facts can be explained by the theory. In Appendix Table B.3 we show the robustness
of these facts to controls for flexible polynomials of latitude and longitude, in addition to
the state fixed effects and controls we include in this section.
2.2.1 Stylized Fact #1: Enslaved and free workers sort differently across loca-
tions
We begin by showing that the fact that free workers chose where to live whereas enslaved
workers were assigned a location resulted in significant differences in their respective alloca-
tions across space.
Stylized Fact #1(a): Free workers sort into higher productivity locations, en-
slaved workers are sorted even more so into higher productivity locations.Panel
(a) of Figure 1 documents that the population density of both free and enslaved workers was
increasing with the productivity of a location, as measured by the geographic proxy of cotton
suitability (conditional on state fixed effects and the other two geographic proxies). However,
the slope of enslaved population density is steeper, showing that enslaved labor is much more
responsive, at least in the cross-section, to agricultural productivity. Columns (1) and (2) of
Table 1 confirm that the difference in elasticities between the free and enslaved populations
is highly statistically significant.
Stylized Fact #1(b): Free workers sort into higher amenity locations, enslaved
workers are sorted intolower amenity locations. Panel (b) of Figure 1 documents
that the population density of free workers is declining in the malaria suitability of an area,
whereas the population density of enslaved workers is increasing in the malaria suitability of
an area. As Esposito (2022) argues, disease-intensive locations were difficult and unpleasant
for free workers to reside in, so instead enslaved workers were allocated to these locations.
Again, columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 confirm that these differential responses to our proxy
for the (dis)amenity of a location for the free and enslaved populations is highly statistically
significant.
Stylized Fact #1(c): Free workers sort into locations with less coercion, enslaved
workers are sorted into places withmore coercion. Panel (c) of Figure 1 documents
that while the population density of free workers is declining with the distance to the North,
the population density of enslaved workers is increasing with the distance to the North.
12
--- Page 14 ---
This is consistent with coercion of slaveholders over the enslaved being easier at further
distances, as escape is more difficult. As coercion does not directly impact free labor, the
fact that free labor is declining with distance to the north suggests the possibility that free
and enslaved workers may be substitutes. Again, columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 confirm
that these differences are highly statistically significant.
2.2.2 Stylized Fact #2: Enslaved and free workers sort differently across sectors
within location
We now consider the allocation of free and enslaved workers across sectors within a location,
asking how the fraction of free and enslaved workers employed in agriculture (instead of
services or manufacturing) in a location varies with our geographic proxies. Columns (3) and
(4)ofTable1undertakeasimilaranalysisasStylizedFact#1, butratherthancomparingthe
free and enslaved population densities at the county level, they examine the sectoral choice of
free and enslaved workers by regressing a dummy variable equal to one if a worker is employed
in agriculture on county level geographic proxies and their interactions with the status (free
or enslaved) of the individual. This procedure allows us to show similar differential sorting
patterns between free and enslaved workers across sectors within a location.
Stylized Fact #2(a): There is no correlation between cotton suitability and agri-
cultural employment share for either enslaved or free workers.Columns (3) and
(4) of Table 1 show that there is no relationship between the cotton suitability of a location
and the fraction of workers employed in agriculture for either the free or enslaved popula-
tion. The estimated coefficients are small and, while precisely estimated, are statistically
indistinguishable from zero.
Stylized Fact #2(b): Free workers sort out of agriculture in high malaria ar-
eas, whereas enslaved workers are sortedinto agriculture in high malaria areas.
Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1 report that while the number of free workers employed
in agriculture is decreasing in a location’s malaria suitability, there is an overall positive
relationship between malaria suitability and the fraction of enslaved workers employed in
agriculture, with the interaction term being highly statistically significant. This is con-
sistent with agricultural work being especially unpleasant in locations with high malarial
incidence, causing free workers to choose to avoid such work and enslaved workers being
forced into such work.
13
--- Page 15 ---
Stylized Fact #2(c): Both free and enslaved workers are more likely to be em-
ployed in agriculture the greater the distance to freedom, but this is especially
true for enslaved workers. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1 show that the fraction of
workers employed in agriculture is increasing in the distance to freedom for both free and
enslaved workers, but this impact is larger for enslaved workers.
2.2.3 StylizedFact#3: Wagesoffreeworkersandthepricesofenslavedworkers
differed with each other and across space.
We now examine how wages of free workers and prices of enslaved workers vary across
locations.
Stylized Fact #3(a): Both free workers’ wages and the price of enslaved workers
are higher in locations with higher productivities. Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows
that both free workers’ wages and enslaved workers’ prices are higher in locations with
better cotton suitability with approximately equal slopes. The first row of Table 2 shows
that this positive relationship is statistically significant for both free and enslaved workers
with equal (and statistically indistinguishable) slopes. The observed positive relationship is
unsurprising, as wages increase with labor productivity.
Stylized Fact #3(b): free workers’ wages arelower in locations with better
amenities, whereas the price of enslaved workers arehigher in locations with
better amenities. Consistent with free workers’ wages offering compensating differentials
forpooramenities, panel(b)ofFigure2showsthatfreeworkers’wagesarehigherinlocations
with greater malaria suitability. Again, column (1) of Table 2 shows this positive relationship
is highly statistically significant. Enslaved workers’ prices show theopposite relationship,
with slave prices falling with malaria suitability. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 show
that both relationships and their difference are statistically significant. We will provide an
explanation of why we observe this opposite relationship for free wagers and enslaved prices
with malaria below.
Stylized Fact #3(c): free workers’ wages arelower in locations with greater
coercion, whereas the price of enslaved workers is (slightly)higher in locations
with greater coercion. Finally, panel (c) of Figure 2 shows that free workers’ wages
are slightly declining with the distance to the North, whereas enslaved workers’ prices are
slightly increasing. Column (3) of Table 2, however, shows that the difference in slopes is
not statistically significant at conventional levels (p = 0.235).
14
--- Page 16 ---
3 A Spatial Model of the Slave Economy
We now present a spatial equilibrium model of slavery that matches the stylized patterns
of labor allocation and pricing documented in the previous section. The model allows us to
disentangle how the coercion, market power, and misallocation inherent to the institution of
slavery shaped the American antebellum economy. Further, our model allows us to calculate
how emancipation would impact the sectoral and spatial composition of the U.S. economy
and the welfare of free and enslaved workers.
3.1 Setup
We begin with a quantitative economic geography model as in Allen and Arkolakis (2014),
extended to include multiple sectors (as in Costinot et al. (2012)), heterogeneous produc-
tivities (as in Bryan and Morten (2019)), and endogenous labor supply (as in Allen et al.
(2020)). As is standard, there is a free labor population that chooses its labor supply, loca-
tion, and sector to maximize its own welfare. More novel is the inclusion of enslaved workers,
whose labor supply iscoerced, the proceeds of their labor is appropriated by slaveholders and
who areassigned to locations and sectors to maximize the profits of slaveholders rather than
the welfare of the enslaved workers. Otherwise, we assume that free and enslaved workers
are identical, i.e. they share the same preferences and distributions and productivity, which
implies they would act identically but for the presence of the institution of slavery.
Formally, consider a world withN≡{0, 1,...,N}locations andO≡{1,...,O}sectors,
whereNN is the set of counties in the U.S. North,NS is the set of counties in the U.S. South,
NUS≡NN∩NS, and location0 represents the rest of the world (ROW), with which U.S.
locations are able to trade. Locations are characterized by a sector specific productivityAio,
a sector-specific amenityUio, and a “coercion” parametercio, which captures the efficiency
of coercing enslaved labor (and will be discussed below). As is standard, each location-
pair is endowed with (iceberg) trade costτij ≥1. The geography of the world is the set
{Aio,uio,cio,τij}i,j∈N,o∈O.
Each location produces a differentiated variety in each sector. Final consumption follows
a nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES) structure in which location-specific vari-
eties (discounted by trade costs) are first aggregated to the sector level with sector-specific
elasticity of substitutionσo > 0 and then across sectors with elasticity of substitutionρ>0.
Workers, indexed byω, receive an idiosyncratic location-sector productivity shock given by
εio (ω) =εi (ω)εo (ω), whereεi (ω) and εo (ω) follow independent Frechet distributions with
shape parametersθand η, respectively.
15
--- Page 17 ---
3.2 The Allocation of Free Labor
Free laborers choose their labor supply, location (within the U.S.), and sector, accounting
for consumption, amenities, and idiosyncratic shocks. The opportunity cost of work (either
leisure or home production) is a constant elasticity function such that the overall utility for
free workers in location-sectorio is given by:
Wio (ω,l) = wiouio
Pi
Aioεio(ω)l−ϕ
1 +ϕl
1+ϕ
ϕ, (1)
where σ >1 is the elasticity of substitution across aggregate location goods,ϕ >0 is the
labor supply elasticity, and the CES aggregate price indexPi =
(∑
o∈OP 1−ρ
io
) 1
1−ρ
is a function
of sector-level price indicesPio =
(∑
j∈Nτ1−σo
ji p1−σo
jo
) 1
1−σo, which are functions of trade costs
τji and location-sector pricespjo.
Given their choice of location and occupation, free workers choose their labor supplyl,
yielding:
lio(ω) =
(wiouio
Pi
Aioεio(ω)
)ϕ
, (2)
i.e. free workers choose to work more the greater their marginal utility of labor. This in turn
implies that the free laborer’s indirect utility from choosing locationi and occupationo is:
Wio(ω) =
(
1
1 +ϕ
) (uio
Pi
wioAioεio (ω)
)1+ϕ
. (3)
Free-workers thus choose a location and occupation to maximizeWio. Given the assumed
distribution of their idiosyncratic productivities, the occupational shares within a location
are given by:
πio,f|i = (wioAiouio)η
∑
o′∈O(wio′Aio′uio′)η, (4)
i.e. free workers sort into occupations within location that have higher wages, productivities,
and amenities.
Using the nested structure of the location-specific occupation utility, the expected utility
of a free worker who chooses to reside in locationi is given by:
Πi,f =
(
1
1 +ϕ
)
Γ
(
η−1−ϕ
η
)( ∑
o∈O
(
uio
Pi
wioAio
)η
) 1+ϕ
η
, (5)
which in turn implies that the share of free workers who choose to reside in locationi is
16
--- Page 18 ---
given by:
πi,f = Πθ
i,f∑
i′∈NUS Πθ
i′,f
. (6)
3.3 The Allocation of Enslaved Labor
As with free workers, we assume enslaved workers get utility from consumption and disutility
fromprovidinglaborwiththesameutilityfunctiongiveninequation (1). 6 However, thereare
three important differences in their labor allocations. First, the quantity of labor supplied by
enslaved workers is chosen by the slaveholder, who behaves as a perfect monopsonist able to
extract all surplus from the enslaved. Second, the labor supply of enslaved workers is coerced
by slaveholders, following Acemoglu and Wolitzky (2011), distorting the labor-supply curve
faced by a monopsonistic owner away from that preferred by the enslaved. Finally, the
enslaved worker is misallocated, as the slaveholder chooses an enslaved worker’s sector and
location (within the U.S. South) to maximize his own profits rather than the welfare of the
enslaved.
Formally, suppose a slaveholder chooses an enslaved person’s locationi, occupation o,
labor supplyl and a remunerationwio,s (which in reality was largely paid in the form of in-
kind subsistence and housing) to maximize their own profits, i.e. the product of the effective
labor and the difference between the market wage and the enslaved remuneration:
max
i,o,l,wio,s
(
wio−wio,s
)
Aioεio,s (ω)l, (7)
subject to a participation constraint:
wio,suio
Pi
Aioεio,s (ω)l−ϕ
1 +ϕ
l
1+ϕ
ϕ
cio
≥0, (8)
where we refer tocio≥0 as thecoercion parameter.
Equation (8) deserves some discussion. The necessity of some sort of participation con-
straint is clear: absent such a constraint, the solution to the slaveholder’s problem is un-
bounded, with the enslaved worker forced to provide an infinite amount of labor with no
remuneration. The particular functional form of constraint (8) has the intuition that the
coercion parameter cio captures the “productivity” of the slaveholder in extracting labor
from the enslaved relative to the disutility incurred by the enslaved person in providing that
labor.
6This abstracts from coercion of enslaved persons in terms of consumption, e.g. being forced to consume
lower quality food, clothing, and shelter. See Rockman (2024) for a recent historical account.
17
--- Page 19 ---
The constraint of equation (8) can also be micro-founded as follows. Suppose enslaved
persons can choose to either remain in slavery or they can attempt to escape, which if
successful earns them a (positive) outside option but if unsuccessful incurs punishment.
Then an enslaved person will choose to remain in slavery if:
Vslavery
io,s ≥Pr (escape)io,sVfree
io,s −(1−Pr (escape)io,s)cio, (9)
where Vslavery
io,s is the value of remaining in slavery,Pr (escape)io,s is the probability of a
successful escape,Vfree
io,s is the value of freedom, andcio is the exogenous cost of punishment.7
Substituting in the utility function given in equation (1), constraint (9) can be written as
in equation (8), wherecio = 1−(Pr (escape)io,sνio,s−(1−Pr (escape)io,s)ψio,s), i.e. cio is
increasing with the (proportional) cost of a failed escape attemptψio,s≡ ciowio,suio
Pi
Aioεio,s(ω)l,
decreasing in the (proportional) value of freedomνio,s≡
Vfree
io,s
wio,suio
Pi
Aioεio,s(ω)l, and decreasing in
the probability of escapePr (escape)io,s.
Inthisenvironment, theslaveholderensurestheparticipationconstraintbindsandchooses
an enslaved labor supply of:
lio,s =
(uio
Pi
wio (Aiocio)εio (ω)
)ϕ
. (10)
The slaveholder’s maximization problem also yields a choice of enslaved remuneration that
is a constant markdown from the market wage:
wio,s = ϕ
1 +ϕwio, (11)
capturing a constant fraction1/ (1 +ϕ) of the value of the enslaved workers’ output.
When the coercion parameter is equal to the markdown, i.e. cio = ϕ/(1 +ϕ), then
the framework is isomorphic to one in which the slaveholder acts as a monopsonist yet the
enslaved worker chooses their own labor supply, i.e. the slaveholder is not able to coerce
additional labor supply from the enslaved. However, whencio >ϕ/(1 +ϕ), the slaveholder
is able to compel additional labor supply from the enslaved at a given wage over and above
what the enslaved would have chosen to supply. Whencio = 1, equations (2) and (10) are
equal, implying that enslaved workers are coerced to supply the same amount of labor as
free workers (even though they only receive a fraction of the earnings from their produce).
7Acemoglu and Wolitzky (2011) allow the degree of coercion to be a costly choice of the individual
enslaver, but in the U.S. South the bulk of slave patrolling and repression was provided by state and local
government (Hadden, 2001), so we take it as a fixed county-sector characteristic.
18
--- Page 20 ---
Finally, whencio > 1, the slaveholder coerces more labor from the enslaved than what free
workers would choose to supply, highlighting that—in terms of the labor supply but not in
terms of enslaved welfare—the coercion parameter is isomorphic to a productivity differential
(or subsidy) for enslaved labor, relative to free labor in the same occupation and location.
This oversupply of labor drives the utility of the enslaved worker downward, reflecting the
cost of coercion.
The payoff to the slaveholder for assigning an enslaved workerωto (i,o ) after optimally
choosing their labor supply and imposing the markdown is:
Wsh
io =
(
wio−ws
)
Aioεio(ω)lio,s = 1
1 +ϕ(wioAioεio (ω))1+ϕ
(uio
Pi
cio
)ϕ
,
which then yields the following enslaved occupational share in each locationi:
πio,s|i =
(
u
ϕ
1+ϕ
io ciowioAio
)η
∑
o′∈O
(
u
ϕ
1+ϕ
io′c
ϕ
1+ϕ
io′,swio′Aio′
)η. (12)
Comparing equation (12) to the equivalent expression (4) for free workers highlights how
enslaved and free workers are differentially allocated across sectors within location, a point
we return to in the following subsection.
Aggregating across occupations, the expected profits of a slaveholder who allocates an
enslaved worker to locationi is:
Πi,sh = Γ
(
η−1−ϕ
η
)
1
1+ϕ


∑
o∈O


(
uio
Pi
)−1
1+ϕ
  
Misallocation
cio
Coercion
(
uio
Pi
wioAio
)


η

1+ϕ
η
. (13)
The highlighted terms in equation (13) show how expected slaveholder profitsΠi,sh differs
from the expected welfare of free workersΠi,f given in equation (5). The misallocation term
shows that enslaved workers are employed in sectors and locations with lower amenities than
free workers, because slaveholders only internalize the disamenities of places of living or con-
tent of work of the enslaved inasmuch as they affect the enslaved’s participation constraint.
Finally, the coercion term captures the additional labor supply that slaveholders elicit from
enslaved workers.
Given the expected profits of slaveholders, we can finally calculate the allocation of
19
--- Page 21 ---
enslaved labor across Southern locationsi∈NS as:
πi,s = Πθ
i,sh∑
i′∈NS Πθ
i′,sh
. (14)
Comparing equation (14) to its free workers analog (6) highlights the differential sorting
across locations for free and enslaved workers, as we will shortly see.
3.4 Explaining the Stylized Facts
We now show how the framework above offers a straightforward explanation of the Stylized
Facts presented in Section 2.2. For expositional purposes, we tackle the Stylized Facts a bit
out of order.
3.4.1 Explaining Stylized Fact #2
Comparing equation (12) to the equivalent expression (4) for free workers highlights how
enslaved and free workers are differentially allocated across sectors within location. Dividing
the enslaved occupation shareπio,s|i from equation (12) by the free occupation shareπio,f|i
from equation (4) yields:
πio,s|i
πio,f|i
=
(
u
−1
1+ϕ
io cio
)η
/
∑
o′
πio′,f
(
u
−1
1+ϕ
io′c
ϕ
1+ϕ
io′
)η
(15)
Equation (15) shows that enslaved workers are allocated relative more to occupations with
low amenities—i.e. Stylized Fact #2(b)—and greater coercion—i.e. Stylized Fact #2(c).
Conditional on amenities and coercion, however, both free and enslaved labor is equally
responsive to the productivity of an occupation, i.e. Stylized Fact #2(a).
3.4.2 Explaining Stylized Fact #1
In a similar spirit, we can compare equation (14) governing the allocation of enslaved workers
across locations to its free workers analog in equation (6) to highlight the differential sorting
across locations for free and enslaved workers. Taking ratios yields:
πi,s
πi,f
=
(∑
o∈Oπio,f|i
(
uio
Pi
)−1
1+ϕη
cio
)(1+ϕ)θ
η
∑
i′∈NSπi′,f
(
∑
o∈Oπi′o,f|i′
(ui′o
Pi′
)−1
1+ϕη
c
ϕ
1+ϕη
i′o
) (1+ϕ)θ
η
. (16)
20
--- Page 22 ---
Equation (16) says that there will be a relatively higher concentration of enslaved workers
in locations with lower amenities, i.e. Stylized Fact #1(b), and higher degrees of coercion,
i.e. Stylized Fact #1(c). In the model, as in the data, both free and enslaved workers shares
are increasing in the productivity of a location, although recall from Stylized Fact #1(a)
that there is empirical evidence that enslaved workers were more responsive to differences
in cotton suitability. This is consistent with the model if the production of cotton is more
susceptible to coercion (e.g. through the gang labor method of production), even conditional
on the distance to the North.
3.4.3 Explaining Stylized Fact #3
To explain the third stylized fact, we first need to distinguish between the wage per efficiency
unit in the model (and denoted bywio) with the wage per worker observed in the data (which
we will denote by˜wio). Similarly, we can define the observed slave price˜pio,s as the profits
earned by the slave-holder per enslaved worker employed in locationi and sectoro. We can
write the ratio of the observed slave price and the wage per worker as follows:
˜pio,s
˜wio
= 1
1 +ϕcio
(
πio,s|i
πio,f|i
)−1+ϕ
η
(
πi,s
πi,f
)−1
θ
. (17)
Equation (17) serves two purposes. First, it explains Stylized Fact #3. Both observed
slave prices and wages are increasing in the productivity of a location-sector in the same
way, so that their ratio is uncorrelated with productivities, i.e. Stylized Fact #3(a). Their
ratio is also increasing with the degree of coercion in a location, as the greater potential
for coercion increases the output per enslaved worker disproportionately, i.e. Stylized Fact
#3(c). Finally, from Stylized Facts #1 and #2, we know that sectors and locations with
higher amenities will have relatively more free workers and relatively fewer enslaved workers;
through endogenous sorting, this implies that locations with higher amenities have higher
slave prices relative to observed wages, since enslaved workers in these locations will have
greaterunobservedproductivities. Or, equivalently, locationswithworseamenities(e.g. high
malaria) will have lower slave prices relative to observed wages, i.e. Stylized Fact #3(c). The
second purpose of equation (17) is that it offers a way of estimating the across-occupation
and across-location supply elasticities, a point we will return to in Section 5.1 below.
3.5 Equilibrium
We now close the model with standard general equilibrium conditions. First, demand yields
a typical gravity equation for the value of goods being sent fromi∈Nto j∈N:
21
--- Page 23 ---
Xijo =τ1−σo
ij ×
(
pjo
Pjo
)1−σo
×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej,
where total expenditureEj in location j∈Nis equal to total income paid to free labor,
enslaved labor, and slave holders, scaled proportionally to account for the aggregate U.S.
trade imbalance, i.e.:
Ejξ−1 =
∑
o∈O
wjoLjo,f + ϕ
1 +ϕ
∑
o∈O
wjoLjo,s +λj
1
1 +ϕ
∑
i∈N
∑
o∈O
wioLio,s, (18)
where ξ≡
YUS +
∑
o∈OTo
YUS
, YUS is the aggregate U.S. income, andTo is the difference between
total U.S. imports and total U.S. exports in sectoro (i.e. the sector trade deficit). Here, we
assume that total slaveholder profits are redistributed lump sump to each destination with
shares λj, which we set equal to the fraction of enslaved workers residing in that location.
Wecanthenformallydefineanequilibrium: Foranygeography {Aio,cio,uio}o∈O
i∈N,{τij}(i,j)∈N×N,
slaveholder profit shares{λi}i∈N, trade deficits{To}o∈O, aggregate labor endowments¯Lf and
¯Ls, and model parameters{σ,ρ,θ,η,ϕ}, equilibrium is a set of prices{pio,Pio,Pi,wio}o∈O
i∈N
and labor allocations
{
πio,s|i,πio,f|i,πi,s,πi,f
}o∈O
i∈N
such that:
1. Payments to labor are equal to total sales:
pioqio =
∑
j∈N
(τij)1−σo
×
(
pio
Pjo
)1−σo
×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej;
2. Expenditure is equal to total purchases:
P 1−σo
io =
∑
j∈N
τ1−σo
ji p1−σo
jo ; P 1−ρ
i =
∑
o∈O
P 1−ρ
io ;
3. Wages are equal to the marginal product:
wio =pio; and
4. Labor allocations satisfy equations (4) and (6) for free labor and equations (12) and
(14) for enslaved labor.
4 Calculating the Welfare Gains from Emancipation
We now derive expressions for the welfare gains from emancipation in our model. We employ
an equivalent variation welfare metric, where we ask how much more would an individual
22
--- Page 24 ---
have to be paid to be indifferent between remaining in the current equilibrium and moving
to a counterfactual equilibrium. Equivalent variation allows us to express welfare under
different institutional counterfactuals in a comparable money-metric. An important caveat
is that we cannot account for any disamenity stemming from enslaved status itself, beyond
the excess labor supply, lower consumption, and worse spatial amenities. For example,
we cannot measure the “dishonor” experienced by the enslaved (Patterson, 1982), nor the
manifold psychic and physical tortures that accompanied slavery apart from those directly
related to the labor supplied. We also cannot account for the non-pecuniary benefits or
costs whites, even non-slaveholders, may have obtained from the institution of slavery and
associated racial domination (Chelwa et al., 2022). We view these estimates as computing a
lower bound, narrowly focusing on purely neoclassical labor supply margins.
4.1 The Partial Equilibrium Gains
We begin by considering the partial equilibrium welfare gains from moving from slavery to
emancipation, i.e. we hold constant prices and wages. It immediately follows that there are
no changes to the welfare of free workers in this partial equilibrium exercise. We proceed by
incrementally removing each component of the institution of slavery.
4.1.1 Removing Coercion
We begin by considering a counterfactual where slaveholders are no longer able to coerce
enslaved workers to work harder but the institution of slavery otherwise remains unchanged.
In this case, enslaved workers can now choose their labor supply, but slaveholders continue to
act as monopsonists and decide the location and occupation of the enslaved. It is straightfor-
ward to show that the optimal mark-down for slaveholders remains the same, but enslaved
workers willchoosetoreducetheirlabor supplybelowthelaborsupply chosenbyfreeworkers
to account for this mark-up, resulting in an equilibrium that is as if the coercion parameter
was equal to the markdown, i.e.cio =ϕ/(1 +ϕ).
What is the equivalent variation? The welfare of an individual remaining in slavery in
location-sector (i,o ) with labor allocation dictated by the slaveholder with coercioncio but
earning a scalar multipleλof the equilibrium remuneration is:
Wio,s (λ,ε) =λwio,suio
Pi
Ai,oεio,s (ω)l−ϕ
1 +ϕl
1+ϕ
ϕ (19)
Substituting in the labor allocation chosen by the slaveholder given in equation (10) and the
23
--- Page 25 ---
equilibrium remuneration in equation (11) yields:
Wio,s (λ,ε) = ϕ
1 +ϕ
(uio
Pi
wio (Aiocio)εio (ω)
)1+ϕ
(cio)ϕ(λ−cio), (20)
so that an enslaved worker is indifferent between slavery with coercion but with greater
remuneration and slavery without coercion if:
λEV
1 =cio + 1
1 +ϕ
(
ϕ/(1 +ϕ)
cio
)ϕ
. (21)
Intuitively, the greater the degree of coercion, the greater the welfare benefits of removing
that coercion and allowing the enslaved worker to freely choose their own labor supply. The
welfare cost of coercion is the difference between the cost of labor faced by slave owners
and that borne by the enslaved.8 The welfare cost of forced labor without compensation
is determined by the intensive labor supply elasticityϕ. A low elasticity of labor supply
implies the curvature of the utility function around the optimum is steep, so that large
amounts of compensation are required to offset involuntary labor supply, whereas a high
elasticity implies only small amounts of compensation are required.
4.1.2 Removing the Slaveholder
Let us proceed by calculating the additional welfare gains from removing the slaveholder. In
this counterfactual, enslaved workers will no longer be charged a mark-down on their wages
and their labor supply will correspondingly increase to be the same as a free worker. This
leads to welfare gains that are equivalent to simply not being charged the mark-down:
λEV
2 = 1 +ϕ
ϕ, (22)
i.e. the greater the markdown, the larger the welfare gains for the enslaved from recapturing
the proceeds of their own labor.
4.1.3 Freedom of Movement
Finally, letuscalculatetheadditionalwelfaregainsfortheenslavedworkerfrombeingableto
choose their own occupation and location, leveraging the Frechet distribution of productivity
heterogeneity in our model. To facilitate this calculation, we develop an intuitive closed-form
expression that provides a welfare metric for misallocation in models with Frechet-distributed
8This is the dimension of slavery focused on in Hornbeck and Logan (2023) that generates their aggregate
inefficiency in partial equilibrium.
24
--- Page 26 ---
productivity, extending the setup in Hsieh et al. (2019), which we summarize in the following
proposition:
Proposition 1. Consider two variations of a discrete choice setting over choicesc∈ C
with payoffsxcycεc, whereεc is distributed Frechet with shape parameterθ >1.In the first
variation, agents choosec∗≡arg maxc∈Cxcycεc. In the second variation, agents are assigned
to c∗∗≡arg maxc∈Cxcεc. Then the ratio of expected payoffs between the two variations can
be written as:
E [xc∗yc∗εc∗]
E [xc∗∗yc∗∗εc∗∗] =
(∑
c∈Cπcyθ
c
)1
θ
∑
c∈Cπcyc
,
whereπc≡xθ
c/ ∑
c′∈Cxθ
c′is the probability of being assignedc∈Cin Variation 2.
Proof. See Appendix A.1.
By the generalized mean inequality, this ratio will be weakly greater than one with
equality if and only ifyc =y for allc∈C. This is intuitive: agents will have higher expected
payoffs if they get to choose their option based on the entirety of their payoffs than if they are
assigned an option based on only a portion of their payoffs. Moreover, it is straightforward to
show that gains from being able to choose relative to being assigned an option are larger the
greater theθ(i.e. the less the idiosyncratic productivities matter), the greater the variance
ofyc (i.e. the greater the heterogeneity of payoffs not accounted for across different choices),
and the smaller the covariance betweenπc andyc (i.e. if the assigned options tend to be less
attractive).
In our context, we can think ofxc as the wage of an enslaved worker (which both the
enslaved and the slaveholder care about) andyc as the amenity of an enslaved worker (which
only the enslaved cares about). By applying Proposition A.1, we can calculate the additional
welfare gains from allowing an enslaved worker to choose their location and sector:
(
λEV
3
)1+ϕ
=

 ∑
i∈NS
πi,s
( ∑
o∈O
πio,s|i
(uio
Pi
) η
1+ϕ
) 1+ϕ
ηθ

1
θ
/
∑
i∈NS
πi,s
( ∑
o∈O
πio,s|i
(uio
Pi
))
. (23)
All else equal, enslaved workers will have larger welfare gains from being able to choose where
they live and what they do if: (a) their labor supply elasticities (i.e.η
1+ϕand θ) are larger;
(b) if the variation in real amenities
{
uio
Pi
}
is larger across occupations and locations; and (c)
if the locations and occupations they are assigned to under slavery tend to have lower real
amenities.
25
--- Page 27 ---
4.2 A general expression
Equations (21), (22), and (23) offer insight into the size of the welfare gains from sequentially
removing each component of slavery, although they do so in a partial equilibrium setting in
which we hold prices and wages fixed.
We can also calculate the welfare effects of emancipation incorporating general equilib-
rium adjustments to emancipation. To do so, we again consider an equivalent variation
metric, although we now set it behind the “veil of ignorance”, where we calculate the scalar
increase in incomeλin all sectors and locations that would make the expected utility of
enslaved workers under slavery equal to the expected utility in the counterfactual. The
equivalent variation approach to welfare allows us to summarize the welfare effects of the
complex changes in prices and allocations induced by emancipation in general equilibrium.
Formally, suppose that a counterfactual delivers expected utility˜U to enslaved workers.
The equivalent variation λEV is then implicitly defined as the solution to the following
equation:
˜U =ϕ×ps×
∑
i∈NS
πi,s
( ∑
o∈O
πio,s
((uio
Pi
) (
λEV−cio
)))
, (24)
where ps is the slaveholder’s annual profits per enslaved worker (i.e. the appropriately
discounted slave price).
A similar calculation for free workers turns out to more straightforward: the equivalent
variation is the ratio of the expected utility under the counterfactual to the expected utility
in the baseline to the power of1/ (1 +ϕ) (to account for the endogenous labor supply).
Because allocations of enslaved workers across occupations
(
πio,s|i
)
and locations(πi,s)are
readily observed, equations (21), (22), (23), and (24) highlight that it is straightforward to
estimate the welfare gains from emancipation given knowledge of model elasticities{η,ϕ,θ},
location fundamentals{cio,uio}, and the price indices{Pi}. We now discuss how to estimate
and identify these parameters.
5 Quantifying the Welfare and Economic Impacts of
Emancipation
We now turn to quantifying the welfare and economic impacts of emancipation. We begin
by discussing how we estimate and identify the key model parameters from the data. We
then present the impacts of emancipation on the distribution of people and economic activ-
ity across sectors and space, followed by presenting the welfare impacts. We conclude by
comparing the counterfactual emancipation results of the theory to the observed reallocation
26
--- Page 28 ---
of free and formerly enslaved populations across locations and sectors.
5.1 Estimation of model elasticities
We now discuss estimation and identification of the model parameters. There are five model
elasticities: the intensive labor supply elasticity ϕ, the across-sector and across-location
extensive supply elasticitiesηandθ, and the across-sector and across-location demand elas-
ticities ρand σ. We estimate the first three and calibrate the remaining two.
5.1.1 Estimationoftheintensivelaborsupplyelasticity ϕfromenslavedmilitary
hires
Equation (11) shows that the markdown that enslaved workers earn relative to free workers
per efficiency unit is solely a function of the intensive labor supply elasticityϕ. As a result,
if one can observe the remuneration of free and enslaved workers who are both providing the
same efficiency units of labor to the same job in the same place at the same time, the observed
markdown would allow the estimation ofϕ. This is the strategy we pursue. Slave hiring
was commonplace in the antebellum South (Martin, 2009), and provides a useful context to
isolate some dimensions of the master-slave relationship. Employers of hired slaves had less
ability to use coercion individually, as they would be liable for potential harm, and hired
slaves were employed in a variety of occupations, many working side-by-side with free workers
(Rockman, 2009). Thus comparisons of payments made by the same employer to owners of
hired slaves vs free workers doing the same job are informative about the markdown, and
hence the labor supply elasticityϕ.
Thus, to estimateϕ, we use the U.S. forts data first digitized by Margo and Villaflor
(1987). As we detail in Appendix A.4, slaves were used extensively on U.S. Army forts,9 in
a diverse range of occupations (we observe 64 different occupations). Because the military
could not own or recruit slaves directly, enslaved workers were almost always rented. The
data report the wages paid to free workers and the payments made to slave owners for
enslaved workers working on the fort. Slave owners could be both local slave owners as well
as army officers that owned slaves that they rented to the military, but the latter would
overwhelmingly be domestic servants (Hamdani, 2022). While the forts data offers only a
select sample of locations (there are 38 forts) and occupations (e.g. very few forts hired
9In 1842, Congress asks the Secretary of the Army to report on the use of enslaved workers in the military.
J.C. Spencer, the Secretary of War responds with “The recruiting regulations authorize only free white male
persons to be enlisted in the army; and there are no blacks or colored persons serving as soldiers; but neither
regulation nor usage excludes them as mechanics, laborers, or servants, in any branches of service where
such force is required” (27th Congress, 2nd day, Doc. No. 282, August 5, 1842).
27
--- Page 29 ---
workers in the agricultural sector), it offers a unique setting where one can observe the
payments to free and enslaved workers doing the same thing at the same time and in the
same place.
Table 3 reports a regression of the log payments made to a worker in the U.S. forts
data on a dummy variable equal to one if that worker is enslaved. One possible concern is
that even within a given occupation in a given fort, enslaved and free workers may differ in
unobserved ways in their productivities. The model above implies that a sufficient statistic
for this sorting is the share of free or enslaved workers employed by the fort that are working
in an occupation. Regardless of the set of fixed effects included or if we control for this
share of workers, we document a stable, consistent, and statistically significant discount for
payments made to enslaved workers relative to free workers. In our preferred specification
including year-month and occupation-fort fixed effects and controlling for occupation shares,
we estimate that slaveholders are paid 18.1% less for work done by enslaved workers than
free workers for doing the same job at the same fort at the same time.
Our interpretation of this differential payment to owners of hired out slaves and free
workers is that payments to free workers include money for subsistence, while the payments
to enslaved owners are net of the (in-kind) payments to the enslaved. The slave rentals
are much more frequently monthly rentals rather than daily, relative to free workers in the
same forts, and the enslaved workers were likely living on the forts and eating military
rations. Indeed, Appendix Table A.4 shows that once we restrict attention to the sample of
contracts where rations are given to both free and enslaved workers, the payment penalty
for enslaved workers shrinks to zero once the number of rations per month are included.
The lower payments to owners are because the forts deduct the costs of room and board for
the payments made to slave owners. This interpretation is the view given by Mark Smith’s
study of army slavery at Key West, where he writes:
“In addition to the monthly wages, slaveholders also benefited financially because
slave hiring relieved them of much of the cost of support. It appears that slave
owners assumed responsibility only for clothing their leased bondsmen. The
engineers took care of the rest. The wage of twenty dollars per month that Lt.
Wright paid the owners for his first slave laborers represented only part of the
slaveholders’compensation. Wrightalsohadtoprovidefood, shelter, andmedical
treatment to the slaves he leased, and this seems to have been the case at both
forts for most of the period, although except sometimes medical services were
dropped from the bargain. The major exception to these policies came at Fort
Taylor when Maj. William H. Chase was the superintending engineer from late
1854 through 1855. Chase, who had extraordinarily large appropriations during
28
--- Page 30 ---
histenure, repeatedlyattemptedtohiremoreslavesfortheFortTaylorworkforce.
In his efforts to supplement his labor force, Chase offered slaveholders up to $1.50
per day for their bondsmen, but he insisted that "The masters furnish food,
clothes, medical attendance &c." Chase could find no additional slave laborers
for these terms.” (Smith, 2008, pg. 511)
Put another way, enslaved persons only enjoyed (in kind) payments equal to18.1% of their
labor. How plausible is this number as a markdown? Perhaps the most famous hired
enslaved worker was Frederick Douglass (Douglass, 1845(1994), employed as a caulker in
the Maryland shipyards, but living with his owner. Douglass also recalls bargaining for his
share of the wages earned, with his owner Hugh Auld sometimes denying him all the wage,
recalling he was paid “a dollar and fifty cents per day. I contracted for it, worked for it,
earned it, collected it; it was paid to me, and it was _rightfully_ my own; and yet, upon
every returning Saturday night, this money—my own hard earnings, every cent of it—was
demanded of me, and taken from me by Master Hugh.” (Douglass, 1845(1994, pg. 85), and
“He would, however, when I made him six dollars, sometimes give me six cents, to encourage
me” (pg. 88). This would imply that Douglass was getting very close to 0, while Douglass,
by his own account, was earning as much as nine dollars a week in 1838. However, these
wages were also covering the value of room and board, which Douglass estimates at “two
dollars and a half per week” (pg. 89), implying he was retaining 28% of his income, very
close to what is implied by our regression.10
In Appendix A.4, we discuss other estimates of the markdown and compare them to ours.
Many estimates have relied on the comparison between slave hiring rates and free worker
wages for the same occupation to infer markdown. But previous researchers have not been
able to look at free and enslaved workers doing the same job in the same organization at the
same time, the way the army fort data does.
From equation (11), our markdown estimates imply an intensive labor supply elasticity
ofϕ= 0.221 ( ϕ
1+ϕ= 0.181). This estimated labor supply elasticity is broadly similar to other
estimates from the literature (e.g. Chetty et al. (2011) estimates an intensive (micro) labor
supply elasticity of0.3); for robustness, in what follows we will also assess the sensitivity of
our counterfactual results to alternative values.
10Other quotes from Douglass’ account of this period give upper bounds. For example, when Douglass
renegotiates his contract so that he can pay a fixed price to his owner and keep the residual income, Auld
accepts 3 dollars a week, with Douglass keeping all the rest of his income, which covered “my regular expenses
about six dollars per week” and allowed some savings. These numbers imply Douglass is keeping at least
66% of his income, which would imply a much largerϕ= 2, but since he has stronger incentives to work this
division of surplus is likely not typical of hired slaves. These fixed-payment contracts were very rare among
slave hires (Martin, 2009).
29
--- Page 31 ---
5.1.2 Estimation of the across-sector supply elasticity ηand across-location
supply elasticityθ
We estimate the across-sector (within location) supply elasticityηand the across location
supply elasticity θsimultaneously by comparing the variation in relative slave prices to
wages equation with relative free and enslaved labor shares across sectors and locations
using equation 17, which we write here in log form:
ln ˜pio,s
˜wio
=−1 +ϕ
η ln
(
πio,s|i
πio,f|i
)
−1
θln
(
πi,s
πi,f
)
+ϕlncio + ln 1
1 +ϕ. (25)
Equation 25 says that, apart from coercion, the only spatial variation in differences between
payments to enslaved and free persons employed in the same sector in the same location
arise from differences in their unobserved productivities, which are reflected in their respec-
tive labor shares. Intuitively, if we observe a large fraction of enslaved people but only a
small fraction of free persons engaged in agriculture in a given location, the average free per-
son should have higher unobservable productivity in agriculture than the average enslaved
person, which should be reflected in lower observed slave prices relative to free wages.
Column (1) of Table B.1 reports a simple OLS regression of equation 25, where we include
the (log) distance to the North as a proxy for coercion. As predicted, the coefficients on
both the within-location and across-location shares are negative and the ratio is increasing
with the distance to the North. Column (2) also includes county fixed effects, which has the
added advantage of only identifying the within-location supply elasticityηusing variation
across sectors within a location.
However, because the residual includes other (unobserved) components of coercion and
these components of coercion will affect the relative shares of free and enslaved persons (see
equations 15 and 16), an OLS coefficient will bias the coefficients on both relative shares
terms upward toward zero, biasing the estimated elasticities upward. Fortunately, however,
our model offers a solution: any proxy for amenities that is uncorrelated with coercion is
an appropriate instrument: from equations 15 and 16, the amenities of a location-sector are
correlated with relative shares (i.e. they are relevant) and from equation 17, they do not
directly affect the ratio of prices to observed wages (i.e. they are excludable).
As a result, we proceed by instrumenting for the relative shares with malarial suitability
(and its interaction with dummy variables for each of the sectors), controlling for our proxy
for coercion. Column (3) shows that this set of instruments, unfortunately, is not strong
enough to offer sufficient variation to estimate both the within-location supply elasticityη
and across-location supply elasticityθsimultaneously, so we instead proceed in two steps.
First, we estimate the within-location supply elasticityηby including county fixed effects
30
--- Page 32 ---
and instrumenting for sector shares with malarial suitability interacted with sector dummy
variables. County fixed-effects will absorb all other sources of county-level coercion, like the
local variation in slave patrols documented in Hadden (2001), increasing the plausibility of
our conditional exogeneity assumption. Column (4) shows that the inclusion of county fixed
effects improves the power of the first stage (albeit still with a first-stage F-statistic of only
6), resulting in an estimated within-location supply elasticity ofη= 2.453. Next, we take
the value ofηas given and estimate the across-location supply elasticityθusing malarial
suitability of a county as an instrument. Column (5) reports the results: we have a strong
first stage, yielding an across-location supply elasticity ofθ= 3.258. These supply elasticities
are similar in magnitude to other estimated elasticities in the literature (albeit in different
settings); although given remaining concerns about a weak instrument, in what follows, we
will also assess the sensitivity of our counterfactual results to alternative values.11
5.1.3 Calibrationoftheacross-sectordemandelasticity ρandtheacross-location
demand elasticitiesσo.
We calibrate the demand elasticities to values from the literature. We set the across-sector
demand elasticity toρ= 0.89, following the estimate in Herrendorf et al. (2013) for homoth-
etic CES demand. For within-sector, across-location demand elasticities, we need three sep-
arate values for agriculture, manufacturing, and services. For agriculture, we setσag = 9.22
following Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016). This is our preferred estimate given our shared
setting (the United States in the 19th century), but it is also very close to the estimate
from Caliendo and Parro (2015) of 9.11. For manufacturing, we setσmfg = 4.05 following
Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2024),12 which also shares our setting and is similar to the median
manufacturing elasticity found in Caliendo and Parro (2015) of 4.965. Finally, for services,
we setσserv = 5.98 following Gervais and Jensen (2019), which is also similar to estimates
from Blank et al. (2022) as well as Ahmad and Schreiber (2024).
11For example, Monte et al. (2018) estimate an across-location labor supply elasticity of4.4 in contempo-
rary U.S., Tombe and Zhu (2019) estimate an across-location labor supply elasticity of2.5 in contemporary
China, and Morten and Oliveira (2024) estimate an across-location labor supply elasticity of3.4 in 20th
century Brazil, and Burstein et al. (2019) estimate a across-sector labor supply elasticity of1.8 in the 20th
century U.S.
12The Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2024) estimate is from a model that combines trade in manufacturing and
agriculture. However, the focus of the paper and model is on manufacturing - for instance, the input price
wedges for agriculture are assumed to be the same as those estimated for manufacturing, and the production
function elasticities are at the county level for manufacturing but at the national level for agriculture.
31
--- Page 33 ---
5.2 Estimation of geographic variables
Given model elasticities, it remains to estimate the U.S. geography. We calibrate bilateral
trade costsτij and then “invert” the model to recover the location-sector specific productiv-
ities Aio, amenitiesuio, and coercion parameterscio.
5.2.1 Calibration of Trade Costs and International Trade
We calibrate the bilateral trade costsτij between all U.S. counties to the values given by
Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) for the year 1860. For international trade, the only addi-
tional data required is trade costs and aggregate trade levels between the U.S. and ROW
in each traded sector. Given observed trade costs, we maintain balanced trade with trans-
fers equivalent to the observed trade imbalance. For trade costs between U.S. counties and
the ROW, we assume international trade is shipped through New York City to Liverpool,
where the additional cost of international trade is calculated using the pound sterling cost of
shipping cotton to Liverpool reported by the New York Chamber of Commerce (Chamber of
Commerce, 1861), converting to 1860 dollars following Officer (2025).13 Lastly, we convert
the calculated cost to a bilateral trade cost between U.S. counties and ROW using the same
procedure as Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016). Aggregate trade levels in 1860 for agriculture
and manufacturing are sourced from the New York Times (1862), while services trade is
calculated from shares and statistics in Officer (2021).
5.2.2 Estimation of Unobserved Location-Sector Characteristics
We follow the standard procedure in the quantitative spatial literature to “invert” the ob-
served labor shares and wages to recover the unobserved location-sector characteristics (see
e.g. Allen and Arkolakis (2014)). One difficulty that arises in this approach is that we do
not directly observe the division of output between free and enslaved persons. To overcome
this difficulty, we use the fact that in equilibrium the expected profits to the slaveholder
from the enslaved will be equalized across sectors and locations.14
What is the expected (annual) profits to the slaveholder of an enslaved person? In what
follows, we it to be $276 per year, which corresponds to the midpoint between the estimate
calculated from discounting enslaved profits using the gross return in Lindert and Williamson
(2012) ($192) and the estimate calculated based on measures of enslaved subsistence con-
13In 1860, New York City was the largest port in the U.S. and third largest in the world behind Liverpool
and London. Roughly two-thirds of all U.S. imports ($234 million of $362 million) and one-third of all U.S.
exports ($121 million of $373 million) transited via New York City (Chamber of Commerce, 1861).
14While in principle it would be possible to use our proxy for slave prices to estimate the output of enslaved
persons, because this proxy also includes other slaveholder assets, it would overstate enslaved output.
32
--- Page 34 ---
sumption ($360). A value of $276 per year in turn implies an average remuneration of
enslaved persons of $61 (ϕ×276) per year. We discuss the sources and motivation for the
calculation of these two numbers, as well as additional evidence in Appendix A.4.
The following Proposition shows that given model elasticities, trade costs, and interna-
tional trade, there exists a unique (to-scale within sector) set of productivities, amenities,
and coercion parameters such that the model equilibrium given these location-sector char-
acteristics is exactly equal to the observed data on labor allocations, wages, and slave price
for locations within the U.S.,NUS:15
Proposition 2. Given model elasticities{η,θ,ρ,σ,ϕ}, trade costs{τij}i,j∈N, slaveholder
profit shares{λi}i∈N,slave priceps, and international imports and exports
{
MROW
o ,X ROW
o
}
o∈O
,
there exists a geography{Aio,cio,uio}o∈O
i∈NUS such that the model equilibrium is equal to the
observed (per person) wages{˜wio}o∈O
i∈NUS and labor allocations
{
πio,s|i,πio,f|i,πi,s,πi,f
}o∈O
i∈NUS.
The geography is unique (up-to-scale) within sector.
Proof. See Appendix A.2.
Intuitively, the wages and free workers’ choices of occupations allow us to identify the rel-
ative amenities: if a free worker works in a location-occupation with low wages, the amenity
value of that location-occupation must be relatively high. Conversely, since enslaved workers
are allocated to maximize profits for slaveholders, their labor allocation (again conditional
on adjusted wages) identifies the relative coercion parameters. Given amenities and coer-
cion parameters, productivities can then be recovered using market clearing conditions. In
Appendix A.2, we also offer an iterative algorithm that in practice efficiently inverts the
model.
Appendix Figure B.4 depicts the resulting spatial distribution of estimated productivi-
ties, amenities, and coercion for the agricultural sector across the U.S. South. The so-called
“Cotton Belt” along the Mississippi and through central Alabama is estimated to have high
productivities, low amenities, and high degrees of coercion. Counties in West Virginia and
Kentucky, in contrast, tended to have lower agricultural productivity, but higher amenities
and lower degrees of coercion. Appendix Figure B.5 compares the model estimated spatial
distribution in agricultural productivities, amenities, and coercion to the geographic proxies
of cotton suitability, malaria suitability, and distance to North we used in the Stylized Facts
15The inversion is unique to-scale within sector because of the possibility that across-sector demand is
complementary, i.e. we allowρ≤1. Whenσo >ρ>1 for allo∈O, the inversion is unique (to-scale) across
sectors as well. See Allen et al. (2024) Appendix A.5 for more discussion.
33
--- Page 35 ---
presented in Section 2.2. Reassuringly, the estimated location fundamentals are strongly cor-
related with their corresponding geographic proxy in the expected direction, even conditional
on state fixed effects and the other two geographic proxies.
5.3 Aggregate Impacts of Emancipation
Given the estimated model elasticities and geography, we calculate a series of counterfactuals
that incrementally dismantle the institution of slavery. As in Section 4, we first remove
coercion, allowing enslaved persons to choose their own intensive labor supply. We then
remove slaveholders, allowing enslaved persons to receive the entirety of the proceeds from
their own labor. Finally, we remove the mis-allocation, allowing enslaved persons to choose
both their sector and location. For this last step, we consider two variants: in the first,
enslaved persons must remain in the U.S. South; in the second, they may reside anywhere in
the United States. In this latter version, enslaved persons and free persons behave identically.
All counterfactuals include all general equilibrium impacts on prices, wages, and allocations
across all U.S. counties.
We begin by reporting the aggregate impacts of emancipation. We report the welfare
impacts in equivalent variation, as discussed in Section 4.2. Economic impacts are measured
in dollars per person per year. Table 5 presents the results.
The first row presents our slavery baseline where the model is calibrated to exactly match
the observed data. The second row presents what would occur if there were no coercion.
Recall from equation (21) in Section 4.1.1 that this welfare gain arises from enslaved workers
being able to reduce their labor supply. This leads to a welfare gain equivalent to a 361%
increase in enslaved remuneration from the baseline scenario, i.e. an increase from $61 to
$281 a year. The magnitude implies that the average enslaved person is coerced into offering
approximately twice as much labor than they would have otherwise, which accords well with
historical evidence on how Black labor supply adjusted after slavery ended.16 This decline
in slave labor causes a reduction in agricultural output of 5.3% and a decline in overall GDP
of 0.9%.17
16It is important to emphasize that we estimate that enslaved persons are coerced into offering twice
as much labor as they would have chosengiven their remuneration under slavery . If we instead compare
slavery to the labor supply chosen without slave-holders imposing a mark-down, we find enslaved persons
are coerced into providing37% more labor than they would have chosen. In comparison, Ransom and Sutch
(1977) estimates that prime age working men in agriculture reduce their hours by 12% after emancipation,
although Goldin (1973) notes that this figure underestimates the decline in labor supply for the family as a
whole.
17The smaller decline in aggregate GDP is because we estimate coercion parameters less than the mark-
down in the non-agricultural sectors in many locations. Intuitively, coercion is difficult in non-agricultural
sectors like manufacturing and services (as evinced by the low share of enslaved workers in these sectors
despite high observed wages), so that the enslaved supply less labor in that sector than they would if they
34
--- Page 36 ---
The third row presents what would occur if there were no coercion and enslaved persons
were able to retain all the fruits of their labor. Recall from equation (22) in Section 4.1.2
that this welfare gain arises from transferring all slaveholders’ profits to the enslaved persons.
The gains from receiving the value of all of one’s labors (or equivalently, removing the mark-
down) is large, equal to a 731% increase in wages in the baseline case, or an additional 81%
increase over and above removing coercion on its own. Overall output increases by 6.5%
relative to baseline, as enslaved persons choose to increase their labor supply once their
wages are no longer marked down.
The fourth row presents what would occur if enslaved persons were free but confined
to remain in the U.S. South. Recall from equation (23) in Section 4.1.3 that this welfare
gain arises from enslaved persons being able to reallocate away from low-amenity / high-
coercion location-sectors toward high-amenity location-sectors. The overall gains relative to
the baseline case are equivalent to a 889% increase in wages, or an additional 19% increase
over and above removing coercion and slave-holders. This welfare gain is substantial because,
as noted in Stylized Fact 1(b) and 2(b), enslaved persons were allocated to low amenity
location-sectors; indeed, we find a negative correlation of−0.54 between (log) enslaved labor
shares and (log) amenities across all Southern location-sectors in 1860. But because enslaved
persons now get to choose their location and occupation to maximize welfare rather than
being forced to maximize profits, aggregate GDP falls by 2.9%.
Finally, the fifth row presents what would occur if enslaved persons were free and could
choose to reside anywhere in the U.S. In this case, all persons in the model act identically.
All told, the gains are equivalent to an 1192% increase in baseline wages, a further 55%
increase over removing coercion and monopsony on their own. In dollar terms, these welfare
gains are equal to an increase from $61 to $788 in annual remuneration—well above the per
capita GDP at the time. As noted in the Section 4, these welfare costs are lower bounds on
the true costs of slavery, as they abstract from any direct disutility of being enslaved that
is invariant to labor supply. Because the U.S. North is estimated to be more attractive in
both its amenities and productivities than the U.S. South, the welfare gains from being able
to move anywhere in the U.S. are substantially larger than the gains from just reallocating
within the U.S. South. Moreover, the ability of the formerly enslaved to move to the more
productive North enables emancipation to increase U.S. per capita GDP by 9.1% relative
to the baseline. On the other hand, free person welfare declines by 0.7%, as increased
competition from the formerly enslaved drives down the wages in more attractive locations
could freely choose. The difficulty of coercing enslaved workers in manufacturing is confirmed in a number of
case studies of slave manufacturing (Dew, 1995), as well as monographs like Bateman and Weiss (2002) and
Starobin (1968). James H. Hammond, one of the leading slaveowners in South Carolina, wrote “Whenever
a slave is made a mechanic he is more than half-freed” (Andrews, 2019, Chapter 2).
35
--- Page 37 ---
and sectors.
How do these aggregate welfare effects compare to the estimates of others? Seagrave
(1971) examines the wage rate of gang-laborers post emancipation to estimate that the
gang labor system requires paying workers approximately 150% more than enslaved persons
were compensated. Building on this estimate, Fogel and Engerman (1974) calculate the
pecuniary and non-pecuniary incidence of the gang-labor system on the enslaved, and argue
that slaves got roughly 5 dollars of additional compensation but bore 75 dollars of non-
pecuniary costs, which corresponds to an equivalent variation welfare gains of removing
the gang labor system of 115%. These estimates correspond to roughly one-third of our
estimated equivalent variation welfare gains from removing all forms of coercion, suggesting
that gang labor was an important (but not comprehensive) component of coercion. Hornbeck
and Logan (2023) focus on the uncompensated externality and the aggregate welfare growth,
and estimate increases in welfare relative to Southern GDP of between 11% and 358%. In
comparison, our estimated welfare gains for enslaved persons from emancipation is equal to
an increase of 241% in Southern GDP, well within their range.
5.4 Impacts of Emancipation across Sectors and Locations
The aggregate impacts, however, mask substantial heterogeneity in the impacts of emancipa-
tion across sectors and locations. For brevity, we will focus on the counterfactual of complete
emancipation. Figure 3 depicts the change in allocation for both enslaved persons (panel a)
and free persons (panel b). As is evident, emancipation would result in a massive change
in the spatial distribution of labor allocation. More than two-thirds—69%—of formerly en-
slaved persons move to the North, but even of those who remain in the South, at least 22%
change their location, moving out of high-productivity, high-coercion, low-amenity locations
like those in the Cotton Belt toward high-amenity, lower-productivity locations like those in
Kentucky and West Virginia. This, in turn, would raise equilibrium wages in the areas they
are departing, inducing free persons to move in. While substantial, the free person response
is an order of magnitude smaller, requiring only 2.4% of the free population to move.
Figure 4 shows that the sectoral impacts of emancipation were also large. The share of
enslaved persons engaged in agriculture falls nearly everywhere from an average of 83% to
39%. While the overall increase in free labor in agriculture is negligible, there are especially
notable increases in the share of free persons engaged in agriculture in locations with high
agricultural productivity like in the Cotton Belt where enslaved persons have fled.
What are the economic impacts of these substantial changes in labor allocations? Figure
5 depicts the changes in the value output in each sector in all U.S. counties. The large
36
--- Page 38 ---
scale exit of enslaved persons from high-productivity, low-amenity locations in the South
combined with the large scale move of enslaved persons into manufacturing and services
results in declines in agricultural output in these locations and corresponding increases in
the output in services and manufacturing. All sectors expand in the U.S. North: Northern
agricultural output increases by 24%, manufacturing increases by 29%, and services increase
by 28%. The South experiences similar growth in manufacturing (19%) and services (8.8%)
but substantial declines in agriculture (-29%). All told, total U.S. agricultural output falls by
5.4%, whereas the services and manufacturing sectors expand by 21%, and 27%, respectively.
Hence, the counterfactual results suggest that slavery played an important role in slowing
structural transformation in the U.S.
Appendix Figures B.6, B.7, and B.8 show how the quantitative impacts of emancipation
varywithalternativevaluesofthesupplyelasticities ϕ,θ, andη. Asisevident, themagnitude
of the economic impacts are of similar magnitudes, the welfare impacts on free persons
remain modest, and the welfare impacts for enslaved persons remain large for all reasonable
parameter values.
5.5 Comparing Counterfactual Emancipation to Actual Emanci-
pation
The previous section highlighted the substantial reallocation of both free and enslaved pop-
ulations across both sectors and locations after emancipation. Did this reallocation actually
occur after the U.S. Civil War? To answer this question, we compare the predicted changes
in population from complete emancipation to the actual population changes across locations
and sectors for Black and White populations using the 1870 complete count Census.18
For both Black and White workers, we compare the (log) observed change in populations
and sectoral labor shares with the (log) observed changes across all Southern counties. Figure
6 presents the results. As is evident, the predicted changes in both (across-location) changes
in population shares and (within-location) changes in sectoral shares are positively and
strongly correlated with the observed changes between 1860 and 1870, with one exception: a
strong positive correlation for changes in Black population shares only exists after controlling
for the initial (1860) Black county population. This provides suggestive evidence that the
formerly enslaved’s actual post-Civil War experience including substantially more migration
frictions across locations than the costless reallocation assumed by the model.
18In particular, we compare the ratio of the Black population in 1870 to the enslaved population in 1860
and the White population in 1870 to the free population (both White and Black) in 1860. Given the relatively
small number of free Black workers in the U.S. South in 1860 (55,000 of 1.6 million free workers), here we
refer to the latter group as “White” workers.
37
--- Page 39 ---
6 Conclusion
We view our model as a first attempt to quantify how the institution of slavery shaped the
antebellum economy in the United States. We have built a rich model of the allocation
of free and enslaved workers across many locations and sectors based on the premise that,
unlike free workers, enslaved workers do not get to choose how much they work, what sector
they are working in, or where to live and work. Using the observed allocations of free
and enslaved workers across sectors and space, together with new data on wages and slave
prices, we estimate the key parameters of the model. We then use the model to simulate
emancipation as restoring a competitive labor market for the enslaved, accounting for the
general equilibrium response, and quantitatively recover the welfare gains to emancipation
and the impacts on the spatial economy across a variety of emancipation scenarios.
The main takeaways are two-fold. First—and perhaps unsurprisingly—the welfare of
the enslaved was enormously reduced by slavery, with emancipation generated an equivalent
variation welfare gain of 1,192%. These welfare losses arise from three sources, all of which
are quantitatively important: enslaved persons are coerced into providing much more labor
than they would have otherwise chosen (361%), a substantial fraction of the proceeds of
enslaved persons’ labor is captured by slaveowners (81%), and enslaved persons are allocated
to locations and sectors that they otherwise would not have chosen (55%). We re-emphasize
that these welfare costs of slavery are undoubtedly lower bounds, as they abstract from any
direct disutility from being enslaved that does not depend on labor supply choices.
Second, we find that slavery had large impacts on the spatial and sectoral composition of
the aggregate U.S. economy: emancipation led to large expansions of the services (21%) and
manufacturing (27%), and a substantial movement of agricultural production into the U.S.
North (where agricultural output increased by 24%) and away from the U.S. South (where
agricultural output fell by 29%). These findings suggest that the institution of slavery not
only slowed structural transformation and inhibited economic growth in the U.S., but also
led to spatially inefficient patterns of production.
To highlight the role that slavery played in shaping the antebellum economy, our ex-
ercise is built on two assumptions: (1) (but for the institution of slavery), the economy
would be efficient; and (2) (but for the institution of slavery), all workers would behave
identically. While we think these assumptions offer a reasonable quantitative benchmark
for evaluating the institution of slavery, they also necessarily omit a number of key dimen-
sions of both American slavery and the larger American economy. For example, the first
assumption abstracts from economic externalities like increasing returns to scale in manu-
facturing or urban agglomerations (Bateman and Weiss, 2002) and labor market frictions
38
--- Page 40 ---
such as monopsony power due to heterogeneous worker preferences (see e.g. Berger et al.
(2022); Méndez and Van Patten (2022)), whereas the second assumption abstracts from hu-
man capital accumulation (Sacerdote, 2005). Other margins that our analysis abstracts from
include intermediate input market and production network linkages (Bailey, 1990), aggre-
gate demand externalities on northern manufacturing(Rockman, 2024), effects on innovation
(Connell, 2024), international capital flows from slaveholdings (Heblich et al., 2022), inequal-
ity in landholdings (Jaynes, 1995; Miller, 2020), political economy considerations (Masera
and Rosenberg, 2021), and credit markets (González et al., 2017). We leave exploration of
these important economic forces for future work.
Finally, our results suggest that the observed allocation of workers in 1870 reflects more
than emancipation itself. Our model predicts that enslaved workers would have been more
mobile across locations than we see in the data. As discussed in the introduction, actual
emancipation came alongside an extremely destructive war, a military occupation, and polit-
ical attempts to restore something close to the slave system. Perhaps these forces, or others
we have omitted from the analysis, can rationalize the persistence of slavery and its effects
well into the present. Again, we think exploring these empirical facts through the lens of
models like the one we have constructed could be a fruitful direction for future research.
39
--- Page 41 ---
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Alexander Wolitzky (2011) “The economics of labor coercion,”Econo-
metrica, 79 (2), 555–600.
Ager, Philipp, Leah Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson (2021) “The Intergenerational Effects
of a Large Wealth Shock: White Southerners after the Civil War,”American Economic
Review, 111 (11), 3767–3794.
Ahmad, Saad and Samantha Schreiber (2024) “Estimating Elasticities for Tradable Services
in Policy Simulations,” technical report.
Allen, Treb (2015) “The promise of freedom: Fertility decisions and the escape from slavery,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 97 (2), 472–484.
Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis (2014) “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Econ-
omy,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (3), 1085–1140.
Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Xiangliang Li (2024) “On the equilibrium properties of
spatial models,”American Economic Review: Insights, 6 (4), 472–489.
Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Yuta Takahashi (2020) “Universal gravity,”Journal of
Political Economy, 128 (2), 393–433.
Allen, Treb and Dave Donaldson (2020) “Persistence and path dependence in the spatial
economy,” technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Althoff, Lukas and Hugo Reichardt (2024) “Jim Crow and Black economic progress after
slavery,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 139 (4), 2279–2330.
Andrews, William L. (2019) “Work, Status, and Social Mobility,” inSlavery and Class in
the American South: A Generation of Slave Narrative Testimony, 1840-1865, Oxford
University Press, 10.1093/oso/9780190908386.003.0003.
Araujo, Rafael and Vitor Possebom (2025) “Potato potahto in the FAO-GAEZ produc-
tivity measures? Nonclassical measurement error with multiple proxies,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.12141.
Bailey, Ronald (1990) “The slave (ry) trade and the development of capitalism in the United
States: The textile industry in New England,”Social Science History, 14 (3), 373–414.
Bateman, Fred and Thomas Weiss (2002)A deplorable scarcity: the failure of industrializa-
tion in the slave economy, UNC Press Books.
Berger, David, Kyle Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey (2022) “Labor market power,”American
Economic Review, 112 (4), 1147–1193.
Blank, Sven, Peter H. Egger, Valeria Merlo, and Wamser Georg (2022) “A structural quan-
titative analysis of services trade de-liberalization,”Journal of International Economics,
137.
40
--- Page 42 ---
Bleakley, Hoyt and Paul Rhode (2022) “The Economic Effects of American Slavery, Redux:
Tests at the Border,” Working Paper.
Bobonis, Gustavo J and Peter M Morrow (2014) “Labor coercion and the accumulation of
human capital,”Journal of Development Economics, 108, 32–53.
Bryan, Gharad and Melanie Morten (2019) “The aggregate productivity effects of internal
migration: Evidence from Indonesia,”Journal of Political Economy, 127 (5), 2229–2268.
Burstein, Ariel, Eduardo Morales, and Jonathan Vogel (2019) “Changes in between-group in-
equality: computers, occupations, and international trade,”American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 11 (2), 348–400.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro (2015) “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects
of NAFTA,”The Review of Economic Studies, 82 (1), 1–44.
Chelwa, Grieve, Darrick Hamilton, and James Stewart (2022) “Stratification economics:
Core constructs and policy implications,”Journal of Economic Literature, 60 (2), 377–
399.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber (2011) “Are micro and macro
labor supply elasticities consistent? A review of evidence on the intensive and extensive
margins,”American Economic Review, 101 (3), 471–475.
Chamber of Commerce, New York (1861) “Third Annual Report of the Chamber of Com-
merce of the State of New York, For the Year 1860-’61,” technical report, New York,
https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.b3010080&seq=9.
Connell, Paul (2024) “A’New View’of America’s Original Sin: Induced Innovation and Slav-
ery in the Antebellum United States,”Available at SSRN 4877471.
Conrad, Alfred H. and John R. Meyer (1958) “The Economics of Slavery in the Ante Bellum
South,”Journal of Political Economy, 66 (2), 95–130.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer (2012) “What goods do countries
trade? A quantitative exploration of Ricardo’s ideas,”The Review of economic studies, 79
(2), 581–608.
Darity, William A. and Kirsten A. Mullen (2020)From Here to Equality: Reparations for
Black Americans in the Twenty-First Century, University of North Carolina Press.
David, Paul A. and Peter Temin (1974) “Slavery: The Progressive Institution?”Journal of
Economic History, 34 (3), 739–783.
Dew, Charles B (1995)Bond of iron: Master and slave at Buffalo Forge, WW Norton &
Company.
Dippel, Christian, Avner Greif, and Daniel Trefler (2020) “Outside options, coercion, and
wages: Removing the sugar coating,”The Economic Journal, 130 (630), 1678–1714.
41
--- Page 43 ---
Donaldson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck (2016) “Railroads and American Economic Growth:
A "Market Access" Approach,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131 (2), 799–858.
Douglass, Frederick (1845(1994))Frederick Douglass Autobiographies : Narrative of the Life
of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave ; My Bondage and My Freedom ; Life and Times
of Frederick Douglass, Library of America.
Engerman, Stanley L (1973) “Some considerations relating to property rights in man,”The
Journal of Economic History, 33 (1), 43–65.
Esposito, Elena (2022) “The side effects of immunity: Malaria and African slavery in the
United States,”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 14 (3), 290–328.
Feigenbaum, James, James Lee, and Filippo Mezzanotti (2022) “Capital destruction and eco-
nomic growth: The effects of Sherman’s March, 1850–1920,”American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 14 (4), 301–342.
Fischer, Günther, Freddy O Nachtergaele, H Van Velthuizen, F Chiozza, G Francheschini,
M Henry, D Muchoney, and S Tramberend (2021) “Global agro-ecological zones (gaez
v4)-model documentation.”
Fleisig, Heywood (1976) “Slavery, the Supply of Agricultural Labor, and the Industri-
alization of the South,” The Journal of Economic History , 36, 572–597, 10.1017/
S0022050700099496.
Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman (1974)Time on the Cross. The Economics of
American Negro Slavery, Little Brown & Co.
Frieden, Jeffry, Richard S Grossman, and Daniel Lowery (2024) “Was Freedom Road a Dead
End? Political and Socio-Economic Effects of Reconstruction in the American South,”
technical report, CESifo Working Paper.
Fuentes, Marisa J (2016)Dispossessed lives: Enslaved women, violence, and the archive,
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Gervais, Antione and J. Bradford Jensen (2019) “The tradability of services: Geographic
concentration and trade costs,”Journal of International Economics, 118, 331–350.
Goldin, Claudia (1973) “The Economics of Emancipation,”Journal of Economic History, 33
(1), 66–85.
González, Felipe, Guillermo Marshall, and Suresh Naidu (2017) “Start-up Nation? Slave
Wealth and Entrepreneurship in Civil War Maryland,”Journal of Economic History, 77
(2), 373–405.
Hacker, J David, Lap Huynh, Matt A Nelson, and Matthew Sobek (2025) “IPUMS full
count datasets of enslaved persons and slaveholders in the United States in 1850 and
1860,”Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, 1–12.
42
--- Page 44 ---
Hadden, S.E. (2001)Slave Patrols: Law and Violence in Virginia and the Carolinas, Harvard
historical studies: Harvard University Press,https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=
WC7andkrJNcC.
Haines, Michael R, Inter university Consortium for Political, Social Research et al. (2010)
“Historical, demographic, economic, and social data: The United States, 1790-2002.”
Hamdani, Yoav (2022) The Slaveholding Army: Enslaved Servitude in the United States
Military, 1797–1861, Columbia University.
Hartman, Saidiya (1997)Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and Self-Making in Nine-
teenth Century America, Oxford University Press.
Heblich, Stephan, Stephen J Redding, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2022) “Slavery and the
British industrial revolution.”
Helper, Susan, Suresh Naidu, Adam Reich, and Aaron Sojourner (2025) “Coercion and
Monopsony in Modern American Manufacturing: Evidence from Alabama Prison Labor,”
technical report, Working Paper.
Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi (2013) “Two Perspectives on
Preferences and Structural Transformation,”American Economic Review, 103 (7), 2752–
2789.
Hornbeck, Richard and Trevon Logan (2023) “One Giant Leap: Emancipation and Aggregate
Economic Gains,” technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hornbeck, Richard and Martin Rotemberg (2024) “Growth Off the Rails: Aggregate Produc-
tivityGrowthinDistortedEconomies,” Journal of Political Economy, 132(11), 3547–3602.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow (2019) “The Allocation
of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth,”Econometrica, 87 (5), 1439–1474.
Hulten, Charles R (1978) “Growth accounting with intermediate inputs,”The Review of
Economic Studies, 45 (3), 511–518.
Jaynes, Gerald David (1995) “Branches without roots: Genesis of the black working class in
the American South, 1862-1882,”OUP Catalogue.
King Jr, Martin Luther (2000)Why we can’t wait, Penguin.
Kiszewski, Anthony, AndrewMellinger, AndrewSpielman, PiaMalaney, SoniaEhrlichSachs,
and Jeffrey Sachs (2004) “A global index representing the stability of malaria transmis-
sion,”The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene, 70 (5), 486–498.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2012) “American Incomes 1774–1860,” NBER
Working Paper.
Lindert, Peter H and Jeffrey G Williamson (2016) “Unequal gains: American growth and
inequality since 1700.”
43
--- Page 45 ---
Lockley, Timothy(2014)“SlaveholdersandslavesinSavannah’s1860census,”Urban History,
41 (4), 647–663.
Margo, RobertA(2009) Wages and labor markets in the United States, 1820-1860, University
of Chicago Press.
Margo, Robert A and Georgia C Villaflor (1987) “The growth of wages in antebellum Amer-
ica: new evidence,”The Journal of Economic History, 47 (4), 873–895.
Markevich, Andrei and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2018) “The Economic Effects of the Abo-
lition of Serfdom: Evidence from the Russian Empire,”American Economic Review, 108
(4–5), 1074–1117.
Martin, Jonathan D (2009)Divided mastery: Slave hiring in the American South, Harvard
University Press.
Masera, Federico and Michele Rosenberg (2021) “Slavocracy: Economic elite and the support
for slavery,”Available at SSRN 4009954.
Méndez, Esteban and Diana Van Patten (2022) “Multinationals, monopsony, and local de-
velopment: Evidence from the united fruit company,”Econometrica, 90 (6), 2685–2721.
Miller, Grant, Debashish Biswas, Aprajit Mahajan et al. (2025) “Productivity Gains and
Work Conditions in Coercive Labor Markets: Experimental Evidence from the Bangladesh
Brick Sector,” technical report.
Miller, Melinda C (2020) ““The righteous and reasonable ambition to become a landholder”:
land and racial inequality in the postbellum South,”Review of Economics and Statistics,
102 (2), 381–394.
Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen J Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2018) “Commuting,
migration, andlocalemploymentelasticities,”American Economic Review, 108(12), 3855–
3890.
Morten, Melanie and Jaqueline Oliveira (2024) “The effects of roads on trade and migration:
Evidence from a planned capital city,”American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
16 (2), 389–421.
Naidu, Suresh (2020) “American Slavery and Labour Market Power,”Economic History of
Developing Regions, 35 (1), 3–22.
Naidu, Suresh and Noam Yuchtman (2013) “Coercive contract enforcement: law and the
labor market in nineteenth century industrial Britain,”American Economic Review, 103
(1), 107–144.
Nozick, Robert (1974)Anarchy, state, and utopia, John Wiley & Sons.
Nunn, Nathan (2007) “Slavery, inequality, and economic development in the Americas: An
examination of the Engerman-Sokoloff hypothesis.”
44
--- Page 46 ---
Officer, Lawrence H. (2021)A New Balance of Payments for the United States, 1790–1919,
Palgrave Macmillan.
(2025) “Exchange Rates Between the United States Dollar and Forty-one Curren-
cies,”http://www.measuringworth.com/exchangeglobal/.
Patterson, Orlando (1982)Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study, Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Posner, Eric A and Adrian Vermeule (2003) “Reparations for slavery and other historical
injustices,”Colum. L. Rev.103, 689.
Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch (1977)One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Conse-
quences of Emancipation, Cambridge University Press.
Rhode, Paul (2024) “How suitable are FAO-GAEZ crop suitability indices for historical
analysis?”.
Rhode, Paul W (2024) “What fraction of antebellum US national product did the enslaved
produce?”Explorations in Economic History, 91, 101552.
Rockman, Seth (2009) Scraping by: wage labor, slavery, and survival in early Baltimore,
JHU Press.
(2024) “Plantation Goods: A Material History of American Slavery,” inPlantation
Goods, University of Chicago Press.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Matthew Sobek et al. (2025) “IPUMS USA: Version 16.0
[dataset],” Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS,10.18128/D010.V16.0.
Ruggles, Steven, Matt A. Nelson, Matthew Sobek, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
J. David Hacker, Evan Roberts, and J. Robert Warren (2024) “IPUMS Ancestry Full
Count Data: Version 4.0 [dataset],” Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS,10.18128/D014.V4.0.
Sacerdote, Bruce (2005) “Slavery and the intergenerational transmission of human capital,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 87 (2), 217–234.
Saleh, Mohamed (2024) “Trade, slavery, and state coercion of labor: Egypt during the first
globalization era,”The Journal of Economic History, 84 (4), 1107–1141.
Seagrave, C. E. (1971)The Southern Negro Agricultural Worker: 1850–1870, Ph.D. disser-
tation, Stanford University.
Smith, Mark A (2008) “Engineering slavery: The US army corps of engineers and slavery at
key west,”The Florida Historical Quarterly, 86 (4), 498–526.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L and Stanley L Engerman (2000) “History lessons: institutions, factor en-
dowments, and paths of development in the new world,”Journal of Economic perspectives,
14 (3), 217–232.
45
--- Page 47 ---
Starobin, Robert S (1968)Industrial slavery in the Old South, 1790-1861: a study in political
economy, University of California, Berkeley.
Takahashi, Motoaki (2022) “The Aggregate Effects of the Great Black Migration,”Available
at SSRN 4283347.
Times, New York (1862) “Foreign Commerce of the United States, as Affected by Civil War,”
Published on 28 February.
Tombe, Trevor and Xiaodong Zhu (2019) “Trade, migration, and productivity: A quantita-
tive analysis of China,”American Economic Review, 109 (5), 1843–1872.
Vedder, Richard K (1975) “The slave exploitation (expropriation) rate,”Explorations in
Economic History, 12 (4), 453.
Weiss, Thomas (1999) “Estimates of White and Nonwhite Gainful Workers in the United
States by Age Group, Race, and Sex Decennial Census Years, 1800-1900,”Historical
Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, 32 (1), 21–36.
Wright, G. (2006)Slavery and American economic development, Walter Lynwood Fleming
lectures in southern history: Louisiana State University Press, http://books.google.
com/books?id=k_ZJrhZ2coEC.
Wright, Gavin (2022) “Slavery and the rise of the nineteenth-century American economy,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 36 (2), 123–148.
Yang, Dongkyu (2024)Time to Accumulate: The Great Migration and the Rise of the Amer-
ican South, Department of Economics, University of Colorado Boulder.
46
--- Page 48 ---
Figure 1: Free and Enslaved Sorting across Locations
(a) Cotton suitability
-1.5-1-.50.5(log) Population density050100150200Plantation suitabilityEnslavedFree (b) Malaria suitability
-1.5-1-.50.5(log) Population density.04.06.08.1Malaria suitabilityEnslavedFree
-1.5-1-.50.5(log) Population density44.555.56Log distance NorthEnslavedFree
(c) Distance to North
Notes: These figures are binned scatterplots showing how the density of free and enslaved
workers varies across counties by geographic characteristics. An observation is a county.
Cotton suitability is the predicted cotton yield given agro-climatic conditions in absence
of irrigation and fertilizer. Malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index developed by
Kiszewski et al. (2004). Log distance north is the Vincenty centroid distance from each
county to the U.S.
North. All plots control for state fixed-effects and the other two geographic variables.
47
--- Page 49 ---
Figure 2: Free and Enslaved Payments across Locations
(a) Cotton suitability
5.25.45.65.866.2(log) Wage / Annualized Slave Price50100150200Plantation suitabilityEnslavedFree (b) Malaria suitability
5.25.45.65.866.2(log) Wage / Annualized Slave Price.06.07.08.09.1.11Malaria suitabilityEnslavedFree
5.25.45.65.866.2(log) Wage / Annualized Slave Price4.555.56(log) Distance NorthEnslavedFree
(c) Log distance to North
Notes: These figures are binned scatter plots showing how free worker wages and enslaved
prices vary across counties by geographic characteristics. An observation is a county-sector.
Observationsareweightedbythetotalnumberofenslavedpersonsinacounty-sector. Cotton
suitability is the predicted cotton yield given agro-climatic conditions in absence of irrigation
and fertilizer. Malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index developed by Kiszewski et al.
(2004). Log distance north is the Vincenty centroid distance from each county to the U.S.
North. All plots control for state-sector fixed-effects and the other two geographic variables.
48
--- Page 50 ---
Figure 3: The impact of emancipation on the distribution of Black and White labor across
space
(a) Change in Black population
 (b) Change in White population
Notes: This figure depicts the counterfactual change in the distribution of enslaved and
free labor across counties in the U.S. South as a result of a complete emancipation. Values
reported are the log of the population ratios.
49
--- Page 51 ---
Figure 4: The impact of emancipation on the distribution of Black and White labor across
sectors
(a) Black, Agriculture
 (b) Black, Services
 (c) Black, Manufacturing
(d) White, Agriculture
 (e) White, Services
 (f) White, Manufacturing
Notes: This figure depicts the counterfactual change in the fraction of enslaved and free
labor employed in each sector across counties in the U.S. South as a result of complete
emancipation. Values reported are the log ratio.
50
--- Page 52 ---
Figure 5: The impact of emancipation on economic output
(a) Agriculture
(b) Services
(c) Manufacturing
Notes: This figure depicts the counterfactual change in the value of agricultural and man-
ufacturing output across all U.S. counties as a result of a complete emancipation. Values
reported are the log ratio.
51
--- Page 53 ---
Figure 6: How well does the model predict changes in labor allocations after the U.S. Civil
War?
(a) Black, Total
-1-.8-.6-.4-.2(log) Observed Change-3-2-1012(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population (b) Black, Agriculture
-.2-.10.1.2.3(log) Observed Change-1.5-1-.50.5(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population (c) Black, Services
-1.5-1-.50(log) Observed Change-.50.511.52(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population (d) Black, Manufacturing
-1012(log) Observed Change01234(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population
(e) White, Total
-.20.2.4.6(log) Observed Change-.10.1.2.3.4(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population (f) White, Agriculture
0.2.4.6(log) Observed Change-.050.05.1.15(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population (g) White, Services
-.8-.6-.4-.20(log) Observed Change-.2-.10.1(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population (h) White, Manufacturing
-1-.8-.6-.4-.2(log) Observed Change-.2-.10.1.2(log) Predicted ChangeNo controlsControlling for initial population
Notes: This figure presents binned scatter plots comparing the model predicted change in
allocations of formerly enslaved black population (panels (a)-(d)) and free white population
(panels (e)-(h)) from a complete emancipation relative to the actual changes observed be-
tween 1860 and 1870 for all Southern counties. Panels (a) and (e) report the change in the
total population in each county; the remaining panels report the change in the share of the
population employed in each sector. All bin-scatters include state fixed effects; each panel
also shows bin-scatters that control for the initial (log) 1860 enslaved or free population.
Values reported are log ratios.
52
--- Page 54 ---
Table 1: Enslaved and free persons sort differenctly
Across locations Across sectors
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Plantation suitability 0.005*** -0.000
(0.001) (0.000)
Cotton * Enslaved 0.013*** 0.013*** 0.001*** 0.001***
(0.001) (0.001) (0.000) (0.000)
Malaria suitability -8.014*** -3.607***
(1.793) (0.945)
Malaria * Enslaved 17.147*** 17.085*** 1.403 0.088
(2.920) (2.914) (1.065) (0.419)
Log distance to North -0.315*** 0.090**
(0.049) (0.038)
Log distance to North * Enslaved 0.701*** 0.691*** -0.076** -0.006
(0.091) (0.091) (0.036) (0.018)
State-Type FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
County FE No Yes No Yes
R-squared 0.482 0.858 0.041 0.153
Number of counties 973 970 990 990
Number of observations 1943 1940 3441367 3441367
Notes: Ordinary least squares. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the number
of free or enslaved workers aged 15-50 per hectare and a unit of observation is a county
in the U.S. South x type of person (free or enslaved). In columns 3 and 4, the dependent
variable is a dummy variable equal to one if a worker aged 15-50 is engaged in agriculture
and each observation is an individual worker residing in the U.S. South. Cotton suitability
is the predicted cotton yield given agro-climatic conditions in absence of irrigation and
fertilizer. Malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index developed by Kiszewski et al.
(2004). Log distance north is the Vincenty centroid distance from each county to the U.S.
North. Standard errors clustered at the county level reported in parentheses. Stars indicate
statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
53
--- Page 55 ---
Table 2: Free wages and slave prices correlate with geography
Free wages Slave prices Slave prices / free wages
(1) (2) (3)
Cotton suitability 0.001*** 0.001* -0.001
(0.000) (0.001) (0.001)
Malaria suitability 3.843*** -5.148*** -8.800***
(0.487) (0.839) (1.036)
Log Distance North -0.048*** 0.006 -0.016
(0.014) (0.030) (0.030)
State-Sector FE Yes Yes Yes
R-squared 0.422 0.303 0.430
Number of counties 964 955 964
Number of observations 2685 2555 2685
Notes: Ordinary least squares. Each observation is a county-sector. In column 1, the
dependent variable is the (log) free wage; in column 2 the dependent variable is the (log)
slave price; and in column 3 the dependent variable is the (log) ratio of the slave price to the
free wage. Cotton suitability is the predicted cotton yield given agro-climatic conditions in
absence of irrigation and fertilizer. Malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index developed
by Kiszewski et al. (2004). Log distance north is the Vincenty centroid distance from
each county to the U.S. North. Observations in column 1 are weighted by the number
of free workers. Observatiosn in columns 2 and 3 are weighted by the number of enslaved
workers. Standard errors clustered at the county level reported in parentheses. Stars indicate
statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
54
--- Page 56 ---
Table 3: Estimating the enslaved mark-down using U.S. Forts Data
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Enslaved -0.249*** -0.241*** -0.229*** -0.194*** -0.181***
(0.040) (0.044) (0.048) (0.049) (0.053)
Log share of workers -0.025*** -0.020*
in fort in occupation (0.008) (0.011)
Implied labor 0.331*** 0.318*** 0.297*** 0.240*** 0.221***
supply elasticity (ϕ) (0.072) (0.076) (0.080) (0.075) (0.079)
State FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year X Month FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Occupation FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Fort FE No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Occupation X Fort FE No No No Yes Yes
R-squared 0.685 0.713 0.713 0.808 0.808
Number of forts 40 37 37 37 37
Number of workers 14909 14906 14906 14871 14871
Notes: Ordinary least squares. The dependent variable is the (log) wage. Each observation
is a worker contract; observations weighted by number of workers on a contract. Standard
errors clustered at the fort reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: *
p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
55
--- Page 57 ---
Table 4: Estimating elasticities using local slave price to wage ratios
OLS IV
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Log ratio of enslaved to free within location occupation shares -0.164*** -0.081*** 0.511 -0.498**
(0.032) (0.021) (0.376) (0.229)
Log ratio of enslaved to free across location shares -0.195*** -0.455*** -0.307***
(0.015) (0.066) (0.036)
Log distance to North 0.078*** 0.293*** 0.181***
(0.029) (0.076) (0.044)
Implied across location elasticity (θ) 5.126*** 2.196*** 3.258***
(0.392) (0.319) (0.381)
Implied within location elasticity (η) 7.461*** 15.120*** -2.390 2.453**
(1.471) (3.873) (1.760) (1.126)
Occupation FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
State FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
County FE No Yes No Yes No
R-squared 0.454 0.843
1st-stage SW F-stat: Within location shares 3.344 5.994
1st-stage SW F-stat: Across location shares 4.182 65.376
Observations 2560 2430 2560 2430 2560
Notes: The dependent variable is the (log) ratio of slave price to wages. Each observation is an occupation-county in the U.S. South in the
year 1860. Columns 1 and 2 are ordinary least squares. In column 3, the within- and across-location relative shares are instrumented with
the Malaria suitability of a county interacted with each occupation, where malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index developed by
Kiszewski et al. (2004). In column 4, the within-location relative shares are instrumented with the malaria suitability interacted with each
location. In column 5, we fix the impliedηat its estimated value from column 5 and only estimateθby intrumenting the across-location
shares with malaria suitability. Log of distance to north calculated using Vincenty distance between county centroids. Implied within
location elasticityηcalculated assuming labor supply elasticityϕ= 0.221. Observations are weighted by the number of free and enslaved
workers. Standard errors clustered at the county level are the reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 **
p<.05 *** p<.01.
56
--- Page 58 ---
Table 5: Welfare and economic impacts of emancipation
Welfare impacts Economic impacts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Enslaved persons Free persons Slaveholders Agric. Manuf. Services Total GDP
Slavery 1.000 1.000 1.000 $143.98 $60.74 $86.84 $291.55
No coercion 4.607 1.002 0.976 $136.39 $62.97 $89.51 $288.88
No slaveholders 8.316 1.004 0.000 $151.27 $65.20 $93.97 $310.44
Emancipation (South only) 9.891 1.002 0.000 $132.12 $70.82 $98.47 $301.40
Emancipation 12.923 0.993 0.000 $136.24 $76.85 $105.04 $318.12
Notes: This table reports the aggregate welfare and economic impacts of removing the institution of slavery. Welfare is
equivalent variation; economic impacts are measured in dollars per capita per year. No coercion means that enslaved
people can choose their own labor supply, No slaveholders means that enslaved people also receive the proceeds of their
labor, emancipation (South only) means that enslaved people can also choose their occupation and location but must
remain in the U.S. south, and emancipation means they can choose occupations and locations in the U.S. North as well,
i.e. they act as free persons.
57
--- Page 59 ---
A Appendix
A.1 Proof of Proposition 1
We begin by restating the proposition:
Proposition. Consider two variations of a discrete choice setting over choicesc∈Cwith
payoffsxcycεc, whereεc is distributed Frechet with shape parameterθ >1.In the first vari-
ation, agents choosec∗≡arg maxc∈Cxcycεc. In the second variation, agents are assigned
to c∗∗≡arg maxc∈Cxcεc. Then ratio of expected payoffs between the two variations can be
written as:
E [xc∗yc∗εc∗]
E [xc∗∗yc∗∗εc∗∗] =
(∑
c∈Cπcyθ
c
)1
θ
∑
c∈Cπcyc
,
whereπc≡xθ
c/
∑
c′∈Cxθ
c′is the probability of being assignedc∈Cin Variation 2.
Proof. The first variation is standard and yields the following expression for expected payoffs:
E
[
xc∗yc∗εc∗|c∗≡arg max
c∈C
xcycεc
]
= Γ
(
θ−1
θ
) (∑
c∈C
(xcyc)θ
) 1
θ
. (26)
The second variation is novel. We would like to calculate:
E
[
xc∗∗yc∗∗εc∗∗|c∗∗≡arg max
c∈C
xcεc
]
Definezc≡xcεc and calculate the CDF ofzc:
Gc (x)≡Pr{xcεc≤x} ⇐⇒
Gc (x) = Pr
{
εc≤x
xc
}
⇐⇒
Gc (x) = exp
(
−
(x
xc
)−θ)
⇐⇒
Gc (x) = exp
(
−(xc)θ(x)−θ)
.
Now we characterize the distribution ofyczc giving the assignment:
58
--- Page 60 ---
Hc (x)≡Pr
{
yczc≤x|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
∫ x/yc
0
Pr
{
max
c′̸=c
zc′≤z
}
dGc (z) ⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
∫ x/yc
0

 ∏
c′̸=c
Gc′(z)

dGc (z) ⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
∫ x/yc
0

 ∏
c′̸=c
exp
(
−(xc′)θ(z)−θ)

 ∂
∂z
(
exp
(
−(xc)θ(z)−θ))
⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
×θ×xθ
c×
∫ x/yc
0

 ∏
c′̸=c
exp
(
−(xc′)θ(z)−θ)


(
exp
(
−(xc)θ(z)−θ))
z−θ−1dz ⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
×θ×xθ
c×
∫ x/yc
0
(∏
c′
exp
(
−(xc′)θ(z)−θ))
z−θ−1dz ⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
×θ×xθ
c×
∫ x/yc
0
(
exp
(
−
(∑
c′
(xc′)θ
)
(z)−θ
))
z−θ−1dz ⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
× xθ
c
∑
c′(xc)θ×
(
exp
(
−
(∑
c′
(xc′)θ
)
(z)−θ
))
|x/yc
0 dz ⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡1
πc
× xθ
c
∑
c′(xc)θ×
(
1−exp
(
−
(∑
c′
(xc′)θ
)
(z)−θ
))
⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡
(
xθ
c
∑
c′(xc)θ
)−1
× xθ
c
∑
c′(xc)θ×
(
1−exp
(
−
(∑
c′
(xc′)θ
)
yθ
c (x)−θ
))
⇐⇒
Hc (x)≡
(
1−exp
(
−Φyθ
c (x)−θ))
where Φ≡∑
c′(xc′)θ.
Finally, we calculate the expected utility times conditional on being assigned locationc:
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
=
∫ ∞
0
xdHc (x) ⇐⇒
=
∫ ∞
0
x ∂
∂x
((
1−exp
(
−Φyθ
c (x)−θ)))
dx ⇐⇒
=θΦyθ
c
∫ ∞
0
x exp
(
−Φyθ
c (x)−θ)
(x)−θ−1dx ⇐⇒
=θΦyθ
c
∫ ∞
0
exp
(
−Φyθ
c (x)−θ)
(x)−θdx ⇐⇒
59
--- Page 61 ---
Definey≡Φyθ
c (x)−θso that:
dy =−θΦyθ
cx−θ−1dx ⇐⇒
dy
−θΦyθ
cx−θ−1 =dx
and:
y≡Φyθ
c (x)−θ⇐⇒
x =y−1
θΦ
1
θyc
with this change of variables we have:
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
=θΦyθ
c
∫ ∞
0
exp
(
−Φyθ
c (x)−θ)
(x)−θdx ⇐⇒
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
=θΦyθ
c
∫ ∞
0
exp (−y) (x)−θ
(
dy
−θΦyθ
cx−θ−1
)
⇐⇒
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
=
∫ ∞
0
exp (−y)xdy ⇐⇒
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
=
∫ ∞
0
exp (−y)
(
y−1
θΦ
1
θyc
)
dy ⇐⇒
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
= Φ
1
θyc
(∫ ∞
0
exp (−y)
(
y−1
θ
)
dy
)
⇐⇒
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
= Φ
1
θycΓ
(
θ−1
θ
)
since Γ (t)≡
∫∞
0 exp (−y) (yt−1)dy and t−1 = −1
θ ⇐⇒t = θ−1
θ. So to summarize,
conditional on choosingc, the expected utility is:
E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
≡Γ
(
θ−1
θ
) (∑
c′
(xc′)θ
) 1
θ
yc
Note that thexc in choicec does not show up in the expression: this is because the expected
xc is equalized across all locations.
This greatly simplifies things. Since the above is the payoffs conditional on being al-
located toc, we can then look at the unconditional expectation, using the law of iterated
60
--- Page 62 ---
expectations:
E
[
xc∗∗yc∗∗εc∗∗|c∗∗≡arg max
c∈C
xcεc
]
=
∑
c
Pr
{
zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
×E
{
yczc|zc≥max
c′̸=c
zc′
}
⇐⇒
=
∑
c
(
xθ
c∑
c′xc′
)
×Γ
(
θ−1
θ
) (∑
c′
(xc′)θ
) 1
θ
yc ⇐⇒
= Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
×
(∑
c′
(xc′)θ
) 1
θ
×
∑
c
(
xθ
c∑
c′xc′
)
yc ⇐⇒
= Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
×
(∑
c′
(xc′)θ
) 1
θ
×
∑
c
πcyc (27)
where πc = xθ
c∑
c′xc′
is equal to the share allocated toc∈C. Combining equations (A.1) and
(27) yields:
E [xc∗yc∗εc∗]
E [xc∗∗yc∗∗εc∗∗] =
Γ
(
θ−1
θ
) (∑
c∈C(xcyc)θ)1
θ
Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
×
(∑
c′(xc′)θ)1
θ
×∑
cπcyc
⇐⇒
E [xc∗yc∗εc∗]
E [xc∗∗yc∗∗εc∗∗] =
(∑
c∈C
(
xθ
c∑
c′(xc′)θ
)
(yc)θ
)1
θ
∑
cπcyc
⇐⇒
E [xc∗yc∗εc∗]
E [xc∗∗yc∗∗εc∗∗] =
(∑
c∈Cπcyθ
c
)1
θ
∑
c∈Cπcyc
,
where recallπc = xθ
c∑
c′xc′
, as required.
A.2 Proof of Proposition 2 and Algorithm
In this section we provide proof of Proposition 2 and the iterative algorithm we use to invert
the model.
A.2.1 Algorithm
We begin by restating the proposition:
Proposition. Given model elasticities{η,θ,ρ,σ,ϕ}, trade costs{τij}i,j∈N, slaveholder profit
shares{λi}i∈N, slave priceps, and international imports and exports
{
MROW
o ,X ROW
o
}
o∈O
,
there exists a geography{Aio,cio,uio}o∈O
i∈NUS such that the model equilibrium is equal to the
61
--- Page 63 ---
observed (per person) wages{˜wio}o∈O
i∈NUS and labor allocations
{
πio,s|i,πio,f|i,πi,s,πi,f
}o∈O
i∈NUS.
The geography is unique (up-to-scale) within sector.
Proof. It will be useful for us to define the labor supply-adjusted wage (from now on known
as the “adjusted wage”),w′
io, as a function of˜wio:
w′
io≡wioAio×
(uio
Pi
wioAio
)ϕ
=
(
Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
Γ
(
η−ϕ
η
))−1
˜wio×
(
πio,f|i
)ϕ+1
η
×(πi,f)
1
θ (28)
Note thatw′
io is a function of parameters and known data.
We can split the proof into two parts: within location and across location identification.
Only the across location component requires the conditions listed in the proposition. First,
we summarize the steps for identification within location:
1. Given parameters{ϕ,η}and the adjusted wages{w′
io}, the relative within-location
amenities{˜ u}are identified.
2. Given parameters{ϕ,η,θ}, the adjusted wages{w′
io}, and enslaved person occupa-
tion and location shares
{
πio,s|i,πi,s
}
, the location-occupation coercion parameters{c}are
identified.
Relative within-location productivities are identified jointly with the across-location pro-
ductivities in the second part of the proof.
Relative within-location amenities
First, we can rewrite the adjusted wage equation (28) to recover the compensation per
unit of labor:
wioAio = (w′
io)
1
1+ϕ
(Pi
uio
) ϕ
1+ϕ
. (29)
Then, we can substitute this expression into the within-location free occupation share ex-
pression to solve for the location-occupation amenities:
62
--- Page 64 ---
πio,f|i =
(
uio
Pi
wioAio
)η
∑
o′
(uio′
Pi
wio′Aio′
)η⇐⇒
uio =


Pi
(w′
io)
1
1+ϕ
(
Pi
uio
) ϕ
1+ϕ

×
(
πio,f|i
)1
η
×

∑
o′

uio′
Pi
(w′
io′)
1
1+ϕ
(Pi
uio′
) ϕ
1+ϕ


η

1
η
⇐⇒
uio =




P
1
1+ϕ
i
(w′
io)
1
1+ϕ

×
(
πio,f|i
)1
η
×
(∑
o′
((uio′
Pi
) 1
1+ϕ
(w′
io′)
1
1+ϕ
)η) 1
η


1+ϕ
The relative amenities in locationi are then
˜uio
∑
o′˜uio′
=
(w′
io)−1×
(
πio,f|i
)1+ϕ
η
∑
o′(w′
io′)−1×
(
πio′,f|i
)1+ϕ
η
. (30)
Coercion parameters
Similarly to amenities, we can substitute equation (29) into the within-location enslaved
occupation share to solve for the coercion parameters:
πio,s|i =
(
u
ϕ
1+ϕ
io ciowioAio
)η
∑
o′
(
u
ϕ
1+ϕ
io′ciowio′Aio′
)η⇐⇒
(
πio,s|i
)1
η
=
u
ϕ
1+ϕ
io cio (w′
io)
1
1+ϕ
(
Pi
uio
) ϕ
1+ϕ
(
∑
o′
(
u
ϕ
1+ϕ
io′c
ϕ
1+ϕ
io′,s (w′
io′)
1
1+ϕ
(
Pi
uio′
) ϕ
1+ϕ
)η) 1
η
⇐⇒
(
πio,s|i
)1
η
= cio (w′
io)
1
1+ϕ
(
∑
o′
(
c
ϕ
1+ϕ
io′,s (w′
io′)
1
1+ϕ
)η) 1
η
,
which gives us
cio.=


(
πio,s|i
)1
η
×(w′
io)−1
1+ϕ×
(∑
o′
(
(cio′,s)
ϕ
1+ϕ(w′
io′)
1
1+ϕ
)η) 1
η


1+ϕ
ϕ
. (31)
63
--- Page 65 ---
As an intermediate step, note that we can rewrite the expected slaveowner utility equation
as


(
πi,s×∑
i′Πθ
i′,s
)1
θ
Γ
(
η−1−ϕ
η
) (
1
1+ϕ
)


1
1+ϕ
=
(∑
o′
(
(cio′,s)
ϕ
1+ϕ(w′
io′)
1
1+ϕ
)η) 1
η
. (32)
Note the right hand side is the same expression as in equation (31). Moreover, we can express
the term ∑
i′Πθ
i′,s as a function of the average national price of an enslaved worker:
∑
i′
Πθ
i′,s =

 ps
Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)


θ
. (33)
Finally, substituting equations (33) and (32) into equation (31) gives us
cio =
(
πio,s|i
)1+ϕ
ηϕ
×(πi,s)
ϕ
θ×
(
πio,f|i
)−1
η
×(πi,f)−ϕ
θ×( ˜wio)−ϕ×

 Γ
(
η−ϕ
η
)
×ps
Γ
(
η−1−ϕ
η
) (
1
1+ϕ
)


ϕ
, (34)
which gives us the coercion parameters in terms of parameters and known data. Lastly, we
solve for the location-sector production for free and enslaved workers. First, note that the
location-level labor efficiency units are functions of parameters, observed population shares,
and aggregate populations:
Li,f = (πi,f)
θ−1
θ×Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
×¯F,
Li,s = (πi,s)
θ−1
θ×Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
×¯S.
Next, we can substitute adjusted wages into the expression for location-occupation free and
enslaved output using equation (29):
Yio,f = Γ
(
η−ϕ
η
)
w′
io
(
πio,f|i
)η−ϕ−1
η
Li,f, (35)
Yio,s = Γ
(
η−ϕ
η
)
w′
io (cio)ϕ(
πio,s|i
)η−ϕ−1
η
Li,s. (36)
Total production for each location-sector is the sum of these two terms.
64
--- Page 66 ---
Across location identification
We now summarize the steps for identification across locations:
1. Given parameters{ϕ,η,θ}, the adjusted wages{w′
io}, identified within-location char-
acteristics{˜ u, c}, and free and enslaved populations and shares{Lpersons,π}, the relative
across-location amenities relative to price indices
{
U
P
}
can be expressed in terms of param-
eters, identified characteristics, and observed data.
2. Given parameters {ϕ,η,ρ,σ}, the adjusted wages{w′
io}, identified within-location
characteristics{˜ u, c}, free and enslaved populations and shares {Lpersons,π}, and trade
costs τ, the relative across-location price indices{P}can be expressed as a function of
relative location-level productivities and the across-location amenities relative to price in-
dices,
{
A, U
P
}
.
3. Given parameters {ϕ,η,ρ,σ}, the adjusted wages{w′
io}, identified within-location
characteristics{˜ u, c}, free and enslaved populations and shares{Lpersons,π}, and trade costs
τ, the relative productivities{A}can be expressed as a function of other relative productiv-
ities{A}and the across-location amenities relative to price indices
{
U
P
}
. This system has
a unique (up to scale) solution if one exists and the condition listed in the Proposition is
satisfied. This also implies a unique (up to scale) solution for{P}.
Relative across-location amenities
Using the expression for free person location shares,πi,f =
Πθ
i,f∑
i′Πθ
i′,f
, we can solve for
across-location amenities:
65
--- Page 67 ---
πi,f =
Πθ
i,f∑
i′Πθ
i′,f
⇐⇒
πi,f =
(((∑
o
(uio
Pi
wioAio
)η)1
η
)1+ϕ
)θ
∑
i′
(((∑
o
(
ui′o
Pi′wi′oAi′o
)η)1
η
)1+ϕ
)θ⇐⇒
πi,f =
(Ui
Pi
)θ(1+ϕ) (∑
o (˜uiowioAio)η)θ(1+ϕ)
η
∑
i′
(
Ui′
Pi′
)θ(1+ϕ) (∑
o (˜ui′owi′oAi′o)η)θ(1+ϕ)
η
⇐⇒
Ui =Pi×
(
πi,f
) 1
θ(1+ϕ)×
[ ∑
o
(˜uiowioAio)η
]−1
η
×

∑
i′
(Ui′
Pi′
)θ(1+θ)
(∑
o
(˜ui′owi′oAi′o)η
)θ(1+ϕ)
η


1
θ(1+ϕ)
⇐⇒
Ui =Pi×
(
πi,f
) 1
θ(1+ϕ)×
[ ∑
o
(
˜uio×
(
w′
io
) 1
1+ϕ
(Pi
uio
) ϕ
1+ϕ
)η]−1
η
×

∑
i′
(Ui′
Pi′
)θ(1+ϕ)
(∑
o
(
˜ui′owi′oAi′o,f
)η
)θ(1+ϕ)
η


1
θ(1+ϕ)
⇐⇒
Ui =Pi×
(
πi,f
)1
θ×
[ ∑
o
(
˜uiow′
io
)η
1+ϕ
]−1+ϕ
η
×

∑
i′
((Ui′
Pi′
)θ(1+θ) ∑
o
(˜ui′owi′oAi′o)η
)θ(1+ϕ)
η


1
θ
.
Then, the relative across-location amenities can be written as
Ui
∑
i′Ui
=
Pi×(πi,f)
1
θ×
[∑
o (˜uiow′
io)
η
1+ϕ
]−1+ϕ
η
∑
i′Pi′×(πi′,f)
1
θ×
[∑
o (˜ui′ow′
i′o)
η
1+ϕ
]−1+ϕ
η
. (37)
Similarly, the across-location amenities relative to price indices can be written as
Ui
Pi
∑
i′
(Ui′
Pi′
) =
(πi,f)
1
θ×
[∑
o (˜uiow′
io)
η
1+ϕ
]−1+ϕ
η
∑
i′(πi′,f)
1
θ×
[∑
o (˜ui′ow′
i′o)
η
1+ϕ
]−1+ϕ
η
. (38)
In this case, the right hand side is exclusively a function of parameters, identified character-
istics, and observed data. Thus,U
P is identified to scale.
Relative price indices
First, we can rewrite the sectoro output in locationi as
66
--- Page 68 ---
qio =Lio,f +Lio,s ⇐⇒
qio = Γ
(
η−ϕ
η
)
Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
(Aio)1+ϕ
(
uio
Pi
[
w′
io (Aio)−1−ϕ
(
uio
Pi
)−ϕ
] 1
1+ϕ
)ϕ[(
πio,f|i
)η−ϕ
η
(
πi,f
)θ−1
θ ¯F + (cio)ϕ
(
πio,s|i
)η−ϕ
η
(
πi,s
)θ−1
θ ¯S
]
⇐⇒
qio =Aio
(
Ui
Pi
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×Γ
(
η−ϕ
η
)
Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)(
˜uiow′
io
)ϕ
1+ϕ
[(
πio,f|i
)η−ϕ
η
(
πi,f
)θ−1
θ ¯F + (cio)ϕ
(
πio,s|i
)η−ϕ
η
(
πi,s
)θ−1
θ ¯S
]
⇐⇒
qio =Aio
(
Ui
Pi
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qio (39)
where
˜qio = Γ
(
η−ϕ
η
)
Γ
(
θ−1
θ
)
(˜uiow′
io)
ϕ
1+ϕ
[ (
πio,f|i
)η−ϕ
η
(πi,f)
θ−1
θ ¯F + (cio)ϕ(
πio,s|i
)η−ϕ
η
(πi,s)
θ−1
θ ¯S
]
.
˜qio is a function of parameters, identified within-location characteristics, and observed data.
Using equation (39), we can write prices as
pio = Yio
qio
=Yio

Aio
(Ui
Pi
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qio


−1
(40)
Then, we can rewrite the sectoral price indices as
Pio =

∑
j
τ1−σo
ji p1−σo
jo


1
1−σo
⇐⇒
Pio =

∑
j
τ1−σo
ji (Yjo)1−σo
(qjo)σo−1


1
1−σo
⇐⇒
Pio =


∑
j
τ1−σo
ji (Yjo)1−σo

Ajo
(
Uj
Pj
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qjo


σo−1

1
1−σo
(41)
Recall the consumption price index takes the form
Pi =
( ∑
o∈O
P 1−ρ
io
) 1
1−ρ
(42)
67
--- Page 69 ---
Price indices are thus expressed as a function of{A}, parameters, data, and previously
identified terms.
Relative across-location productivities
For exposition, we first show the identification of productivities without international
trade. We can substitute equation (39) into the market clearing condition to writeA as a
system of fixed point equations:
Yio =
∑
j
τ1−σo
ij (pio)1−σo
∑
kτ1−σo
kj (pko)1−σo×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej ⇐⇒
Yio =
∑
j
τ1−σo
ij
(
Yio
qio
)1−σo
∑
kτ1−σo
kj
(
Yko
qko
)1−σo×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej ⇐⇒
Yio =
∑
j
τ1−σo
ij (Yio)1−σo
(
Aio
(
Ui
Pi
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qio
)σo−1
(Pjo)1−σo ×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej ⇐⇒
(Aio)1−σo
= 1
Yio
∑
j
τ1−σo
ij (Yio)1−σo
((
Ui
Pi
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qio
)σo−1
(Pjo)1−σo ×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej. (43)
Let us define xio ≡(Aio)1−σo
and yio ≡(Pio)1−σo
such that we can write the system of
equations
xio = 1
Yio
∑
j
τ1−σo
ij (Yio)1−σo
((
Ui
Pi
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qio
)σo−1
yjo
×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej
yio =
∑
j
τ1−σo
ji (Yjo)1−σo


(
Uj
Pj
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qjo


σo−1
(xjo)−1.
Note that Uj
Pj
was previously identified, so we can treat it as a constant. Let us define this
system of equations asFo (xo, yo), where the system is defined for a given sectoro and set of
sectoral expenditure shares
{(Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ}
j∈N
. We now use the strategy of Allen et al. (2024)
to show thatFo (Ao, Po) has a unique (up to scale) fixed point solution. For a given system,
let us define the elasticityϵijh,jh′(vj)≡∂logfijh(vj)
∂logvjh′, whereh∈{x,y}andvjx =xjo,vjy =yjo.
Suppose there is some2×2 matrix Z such that|ϵijh,jh′(vj)|< Zhh′; then, ifρ(Z)≤1, there
68
--- Page 70 ---
exists a unique (up to scale) solution.
Webeginbycalculatingtheelasticities. First, notethat ∂logfijx(vj)
∂logvjx
= 0and ∂logfijy(vj)
∂logvjy
= 0
for allx and y. Then, we have
∂logfijx (vj)
∂logvjy
=−∂
∂logyjo
(logyjo) =−1,
and
∂logfijy (vj)
∂logvjx
=−∂
∂logxjo
(logxjo) =−1.
Then we can define
Z≡

0 1
1 0

,
which satisfies the condition that|ϵijh,jh′(vj)|≤Zhh′and has spectral radius 1. Therefore,
there exists a unique (up-to-scale) fixed point for the system.
The last step is to show how we identify prices in the ROW with aggregate trade data.
Note that we can sum across the market clearing conditions for exports from the ROW to
write (denoting the ROW location asr)
∑
j̸=r
Xrjo =
∑
j̸=r
τ1−σo
ij (Yio)1−σo
(
Aio
(
Ui
Pi
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qio
)σo−1
(Pjo)1−σo ×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej ⇐⇒
(Aio)1−σo
= 1
∑
j̸=rXrjo
∑
j̸=r
(
τrj
Pjo
)1−σo
×
(
Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ
×Ej.
∑
j̸=rXrjo is the aggregate exports from the ROW to the US, which we observe in the
data. Note this equation is nearly identical to Equation (43). As before, we can set up
a system of fixed point equations for a particular sectoro and set of sectoral expenditure
shares
{(Pjo
Pj
)1−ρ}
j∈N
. Then, proving solution uniqueness through the Allen et al. (2024)
conditions proceeds identically, with the exception that the data term∑
j̸=rXrjo substitutes
for the previously identifiedYio.
Since our solution is unique up to scale, we can choose an arbitrary normalization for
two out of three characteristics within and across location respectively. Within location, we
normalize a and u to have mean one for each location. Across location, we normalizeA and
U to have mean one. To justify this, we show that this is equivalent to a normalization of
69
--- Page 71 ---
P and U
P, which we identified in relative terms:
Lemma 3.Any scaling ofA and U that is consistent with model equilibrium can be repre-
sented by a model consistent scaling ofP and U
P.
Proof. Note that equations (38) and (43) are unaffected by the scaling of any variables, so
it suffices to consider equation (41). Suppose we have some scalecA for A andcU for U. We
can then write
Pio =


∑
j
τ1−σo
ji (Yjo)1−σo

cAAjo
(
cUUj
Pj
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qjo


σo−1

1
1−σo
⇐⇒
1
cA
Pio =


∑
j
τ1−σo
ji (Yjo)1−σo

Ajo
(
cU
Uj
Pj
) ϕ
1+ϕ
×˜qjo


σo−1

1
1−σo
Thus, an equivalent and consistent scaling can be generated by scalingP by 1
cA
and U
P
bycU.
A.2.2 Algorithm
The algorithm is provided below:
1. For each location:
(a) Use the elasticities, observed wages, and free worker occupation shares to calculate
relative amenities with that location using Equation (30).
(b) Use the elasticities, observed wages and enslaved worker occupation shares to
calculate relative coercion parameters within a location and scale across locations
with the national enslaved price using Equation (34).
(c) Use the elasticities, observed wages, occupation shares, and coercion parameters
to calculate free and enslaved output in each sector using Equations (35) and (36).
(d) Use the elasticities, parameters, output, and slaveholder profit shares to calculate
total expenditures in each location using Equation (18).
2. Then, we begin with some initial state forAio,uio,pijo for alli,j,o :
(a) Use the elasticities and current prices to calculate the current sectoral and con-
sumption price indices using Equations (41) and (42).
70
--- Page 72 ---
(b) Use the elasticities, output, current productivities, current amenities, and current
price indices to update the prices using Equation (40).
(c) Usetheelasticities, locationshares, relativewithin-locationamenities, andcurrent
price indices to calculate the relative amenities across locations using Equation
(37).
(d) Use the elasticities, trade costs, output, quantities, expenditures, current prices,
and current price indices to update the productivities using Equation (43).
(e) We then iterate over steps 2(a) through 2(d) until the solution converges.
A.3 Validating Slave Allocations and Prices
IPUMS at the University of Minnesota has kept a 5% micro sample of slave schedules since
2004 (Menard et al. 2004), but in 2024 the complete enumeration of the slave schedules
was completed. As Hacker et al write “Where the original IPUMS sample of the 1860
slave census contained records for 195,027 enslaved persons, for example, the full count
dataset includes individual-level information on 3,936,602 slaves.” Of these enslaved people,
1,937,259 are between the ages of 15 and 50, which we classify workers comparable to the
free population.19
The slaveholder listed on the 1860 enumeration schedule is ““The person in whose charge,
or on whose plantation the slave is to be found to be employed may return all slaves in his
charge (although they may be owned by other persons) provided they are not returned by
their proper owner. The name of the bona fide owner should be returned as proprietor, and
the name of the person having them in charge as employer.” IPUMS has also coded the slave-
holding type as “owner, business/institution, employer, overseer/manager, trustee/guardian,
and estate”. The IPUMS linking of 1860 population schedules to the slave schedules relied
on name similarity, restricted to population schedules with personal property greater than
100$, and blocking on either county or state. See Hacker et al. for more details.
Assignment of Enslaved Sectors: We use this data to document patterns of slave-
owner employment. Recall that we use the IPUMS 1880 occupation code assigned to the
primary slaveholder linked to the slaveholding. Slaveholders, however, may be doing occu-
pations quite different from the enslaved on the holding, for example if the slaveholder is an
absentee plantation holder, say working as a lawyer or doctor in central Charleston while
the plantation is on the outskirts, or a small merchant hiring out a set of enslaved workers
19Hacker et al. (2025)caution that the transcription quality is not as high as the IPUMS population
censuses, as they are done based on Ancestry transcriptions which are lower quality, e.g. often fail to
disambiguate slaveowholdings.
71
--- Page 73 ---
for additional income. While geographic blocking for matches will restrict the degree of
absentee ownership, it will not completely eliminate it. Further, IPUMS records multiple
slaveholders for some holdings, along with slaveholding type, but there are many missing
values, and the original records are not consistent enough to rule out considerable ambiguity
in this measure. This is true even in the least ambiguous and most common case, when
the slaveholder is a slaveowner engaged in agriculture. Even in this case, much of the rural
handicrafts, construction, and service work on the plantations would have been done by the
enslaved, and we would assign this work to agricultural sector. However, given the absence
of any other geographically disaggregate measures of slave industrial allocation, we view our
method as defensible. At the aggregate level, for example, our imputation yields reasonable
quantities. Of the 1.94 million enslaved workers, our procedure assigned 1.60 million to be
employed in agriculture (83%), 77,000 to be employed in manufacturing (4%), and 259,000
to be employed in services (13%). This accords well with prior estimates; for example, Rhode
(2024) assigns one domestic servant slave to each slaveholding household, and then assigns
the balance of non-agricultural enslaved from Weiss (1999) to the secondary sector, which
yields roughly 10% share in services and 6% in manufacturing. Based on historical evidence,
Starobin (1968) estimates that 200,000 enslaved workers were employed in industry, while
our method yields less than half that. Rhode (2024) , for example, along with Bateman and
Weiss (2002), both argue that Starobin’s estimates are likely too high, and wind up with
numbers closer to ours.
Appendix Table B.6 shows the 20 most common detailed (1880 IPUMS) assigned slave
occupations in our sample, along with the average size of the slaveholding and the number
of enslaved workers. Unsurprisingly, agricultural occupations dominate. The next most
common are a variety of service occupations, followed by manufacturing.
Appendix Table B.7 shows a regression table, restricted to the sample of enslaved workers
with matched occupations, with correlates of enslaved employed by slaveholders in service
and manufacturing, relative to agriculture, controlling for county fixed effects. Enslaved
workersinmanufacturingandservicesaremorelikelytobeinacity, onsmallerslaveholdings,
more likely to be held by a non-owner (an employer, hirer,estate or corporation), relative to
agricultural slaves. Manufacturing enslaved workers are much more likely to be hired out
(slaveowner is employer or hirer) than either agriculture or services. This is consistent with
the large qualitative literature(Dew, 1995) suggesting that many enslaved workers that were
in manufacturing were hired or rented, relative to owned. For example, Starobin (1968)
estimates that as many as 20% of industrial slaves were hired out.
Further, the table shows some of the selection and incentives differences between en-
slaved workers across sectors. Enslaved workers in services were significantly more likely
72
--- Page 74 ---
to be women, while there is no difference between manufacturing and agriculture in gender
composition. Female slaveowners, however, are significantly less likely to own slaves in ei-
ther non-agricultural sector, and particularly manufacturing. Perhaps surprisingly , within
county there is no difference in fugitive rates across sectors, consistent with our identifica-
tion strategy with county-fixed effects. For manumissions, however, enslaved workers in the
service sector are significantly more likely to be manumitted, relative to either agriculture
or manufacturing.
Constructing local slave prices: As a proxy for county-sector slave profitability,
we use personal property values of slave owners divided by the number of slaves in the
slaveholding, adjusted for demographic composition. The average slave price implied by
the regression is very close to the average from 1860. Further, the demographic coefficients
on slave prices are close to those from slave price data, with lower prices for children and
elderly slaves, and little difference between prime-age male and female slaves, as has been
well-documented in a literature on slave prices beginning with Conrad and Meyer (1958).
We can further check these numbers by using the Gallman and Parker sample of cotton
farmers to assess the contribution of non-slave wealth to personal property. The Gallman
and Parker sample includes slaveholding demographic characteristics, but is also linked to
the agricultural schedules, so we can directly test for the contribution of farm equipment and
livestock to personal property, and test if controlling for these variables affects the coefficients
on the demographic characteristics. Table B.4 shows results from this regression. As can
be seen from the table, adding controls for livestock and farm equipment does not alter the
demographic coefficients, and indeed have small coefficients themselves, lending credence to
the assumption that the bulk of slaveowner personal property was indeed the value of their
enslaved workers.
Estimating annual slave profits: In the model, the slave price is the expected profits
earned by slaveholders per enslaved person,ps = Γ
(
θ−1
θ
) (∑
i Πθ
i,sh
)1
θ
. We pursue two alter-
native ways of estimatingps. First, we use observed slave prices. Because the model is static,
it does not capture the present discounted value of the entire future flow of profits, so we
take the observed slave price and divide by the appropriate discount rate. The median slave
price of prime age working men across all sector-locations in our data is $1,747. Lindert and
Williamson report a 5% net rate of return and a 6% depreciation rate for enslaved workers,
suggesting that the appropriate discount rate is 11%, which implies a expected annual profit
earned by slaveholders per enslaved person of $192.
Second, we estimate the expected profits earned by slaveholders per enslaved person
by appropriately scaling enslaved consumption by the inverse of the intensive labor supply
elasticity ϕ. Lindert and Williamson estimate a median value of slave consumption of$79;
73
--- Page 75 ---
given our estimate ofϕ= 0.22 this implies thatps = $360. We take the midpoint of these
two numbers as our main estimate of the flow value of enslaved labor.
A.4 Validating Markdown Estimates
Wage-setting and Slave rentals on U.S. Army Forts:Slaves were used extensively on
U.S. Army forts, but as the military could not own slaves directly, enslaved workers were
almost always rented. As forts were often located in remote and rural areas, securing free
labor for construction and transportation jobs that could not be filled by enlisted troops was
difficult, and so the U.S. army would rent enslaved workers from local slave owners, generally
for month-long terms. Sometimes those owners were army officers themselves, as Hamdani
(2022) shows using a database of reimbursements for slave costs made to slaveowning army
officers. Indeed, use of enslaved labor on forts was pervasive enough so that slave owners
would purchase slaves solely for rental to nearby military forts, rather than any production.
Direct evidence from Army forts (rather than Navy yards) is rarer, but what historical
evidence is available suggests that the labor conditions are comparable.
The set of occupations enslaved workers were put to was also very diverse. There was
little agricultural activity, let alone commercial plantation crop production, on military and
navybases. Whilethemostcommonoccupationwassimplelaborer, moreskilledoccupations
like carpenters and bricklayers, as well as even more skilled occupations like blacksmith are
all filled by enslaved workers in the U.S. army quartermaster reports.
There is also historical evidence that there was little difference in working conditions or
skill between enslaved and free workers doing the same job. Other autobiographies from
military slaves include George Teomoh and Michael Shiner, both of whom got their freedom
from navy yards, and also provide first-hand evidence of the comparable nature of work
between free and enslaved workers. Shiner, for example, was manumitted by his owner while
employed at the Washington Navy Yard, but continued to voluntarily work there throughout
his career. For example, when President Buren shortens the workday for workers in the
Washington Navy yards, he does not distinguish between free and enslaved workers, Shiner
writes in his diary:” By the federal government should Work the ten hour Sistom from six
to six i think and May the lord Bless Mr. Van Buran“. Naval Commodore Isaac Hull writes
to Congress about the skill and productivity of enslaved workers “The competent mechanics
have long known them and I have no cause to complain on the contrary I consider them the
hardest working men in the yard and as they understand their work they can do much more
work in a day than new hands could and I should suppose it would require many weeks if
not months to get a gang of hands for the Anchor Shop to do the work that is now done."
74
--- Page 76 ---
Evidence that the observed penalty for enslaved workers is the markdown
We are interpreting the rental rate paid by the army forts as the amount paid to owners,
not including the amount paid to the enslaved, as is common in the literature estimating
retained earnings of enslaved workers (Lindert and Williamson, 2012). Margo and Villaflor
write (pg 34): “Unskilled slaves received lower wages than their free counterparts, but the
differences were statistically significant only at South Central forts. Slave artisans, however,
received significantly lower wages than free artisans. The source of this differential is unclear.
Although the lower wage is consistent with a lower average skill level, the army may have
customarily furnished tools to slave artisans, or the costs of supervising slaves may have been
higher.” A penalty in slave rental rates relative to wages is consistent with the monopsony
interpretation of the slave owner: the U.S. army directly provided slaves their consumption,
and the remainder is what goes to the owners, while free workers get wages in addition to
theirconsumption. Putdifferently, thedailymarginalproductforslavehiresandfreeworkers
doing the same job is the same, but free workers keep the whole product (as a combination of
rations and money wages), while enslaved workers get rations and their owners get the money
payments. Consistent with this interpretation, we can check in the fort data whether there
are markdowns in situations where free workers also get rations. As Table B.5 shows, once
we control for rations in this sample (where free workers get higher rations than enslaved
workers), the markdown for enslaved workers disappears.
Comparison to other estimates of the markdown
Estimatesofthegapbetweenenslavedmarginalproductandwageshavebeenconstructed
and used by other researchers, albeit to our knowledge none have attempted the narrow
within-occupation, within-organization comparison enabled by the army fort quartermaster
reports. For example, Lindert and Williamson (2016) find estimates of enslaved retention
of earnings between 29.1% and 59.3%, by comparing state-level free agricultural wages with
hire rates, under a similar assumption as ours that the hire rates don’t include costs of
subsistence. Other estimates rely on estimates of enslaved worker consumption bundles
compared to estimates of slave earnings or marginal products. Fogel and Engerman (1974),
using a consumption basket worth $42.99, report a “discounted” markdown of 88-90%, with
slaves retaining the vast bulk of their production over the lifecycle, but David and Temin
(1974) emphasize that the correct estimate should be the undiscounted markdown of 49%,
and emphasize that even this is too low and that the enslaved consumption basket was worth
much less. Vedder (1975) estimates production functions to get enslaved marginal products,
using $30.00 as the estimate of enslaved consumption, and gets markdowns of 33-40% in
1860.
75
--- Page 77 ---
B Appendix Figures and Tables
Figure B.1: Spatial Distribution of Geographic Proxies
(a) Cotton suitability
 (b) Malaria suitability
(c) Distance to North
Notes: This figure shows the spatial variation in cotton suitability, malaria suitability, and
distance to the North across counties in the U.S. South.
76
--- Page 78 ---
Figure B.2: Spatial Distribution of Geographic Proxies (Residualized)
(a) Cotton suitability
 (b) Malaria suitability
(c) Log distance to North
Notes: This figure shows the residual spatial variation in cotton suitability, malaria suit-
ability, and distance to the North across counties in the U.S. South that will be used in
the stylized facts that follow after conditioning on state fixed effects and the other two geo-
graphic variables.
77
--- Page 79 ---
Figure B.3: Geographic Proxies Predict Output, Mortality, and Runaways
	MPH
BHSJDVMUVSBMPVUQVUWBMVF$PUUPOTVJUBCJMJUZ
	MPH
DPUUPOPVUQVU$PUUPOTVJUBCJMJUZ
(a)Agriculturaloutputvalueandcottonoutputarebothincreasingwithcottonsuitability
	MPH
ZSPMETZSPMET.BMBSJBTVJUBCJMJUZ
4MBWF'SFF.BMBSJB.PSUBMJUZ3BUJP.BMBSJBTVJUBCJMJUZ
(b) The share of old persons is decreasing with malaria suitability, while slave deaths,
relative to free deaths, due to malaria increase with malaria suitability.
TIBSFGVHJUJWF-PHEJTUBODF/PSUI
-PH	3FXBSE7BMVF
JO'VHJUJWF"ET	
-PHEJTUBODF/PSUI
(c) The share of fugitive slaves, as well as the cost of recapturing runaways, is decreasing
with distance to the North
Notes: These bin-scatters across counties in the U.S. South show that cotton suitability
is correlated with agricultural productivity (panel a), malaria suitability is correlated with
share of elderly free people (panel b), and distance to the North is correlated with share
of enslaved workers that are reported as runaways (panel c). Each of these of binscatters
controls for state fixed effects and the other two geographic variables.
78
--- Page 80 ---
Figure B.4: Estimated location fundamentals for agriculture
(a) Agricultural productivity
 (b) Agricultural amenity
(c) Agricultural coercion
Notes: This figure shows the spatial variation of estimated agricultural productivities(Aio),
amenities (uio), and coercion(cio,s) across counties in the U.S. South.
79
--- Page 81 ---
Figure B.5: Comparing estimated location fundamentals for agriculture to corresponding
geographic proxies
(a) Agricultural productivity
.4.5.6.7.8.9(log) Ag. productivity050100150200Cotton suitability (b) Agricultural amenity
-1.6-1.5-1.4-1.3-1.2(log) Ag. amenity.04.06.08.1Malaria suitability
(c) Agricultural coercion
-3-2-101(log) Coercion44.555.56(Log) Distance North
Notes: This figure presents binscatters of the estimated the agricultural productivities(Aio),
amenities (uio), and coercion (cio,s) on their corresponding geographic proxies used in the
Stylized Facts above, conditional on the other two geographic proxies and state fixed effects.
80
--- Page 82 ---
Figure B.6: Robustness of counterfactual results to alternative values ofϕ
(a) Welfare impact of emancipa-
tion: Blacks
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Labor supply elasticity within location-sector (?)
0
50
100
150
(b) Welfare impact of emancipa-
tion: Whites
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Labor supply elasticity within location-sector (?)
0.9905
0.991
0.9915
0.992
0.9925
0.993
0.9935
0.994
0.9945
0.995
(c) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Total GDP
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Labor supply elasticity within location-sector (?)
317.85
317.9
317.95
318
318.05
318.1
318.15
318.2
318.25
(d) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Agriculture
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Labor supply elasticity within location-sector (?)
136
136.1
136.2
136.3
136.4
136.5
136.6
(e) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Services
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Labor supply elasticity within location-sector (?)
104.75
104.8
104.85
104.9
104.95
105
105.05
105.1
105.15
(f) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Manufacturing
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1Labor supply elasticity within location-sector (?)
76.55
76.6
76.65
76.7
76.75
76.8
76.85
76.9
76.95
77
Notes: This figure shows the aggregate welfare and economic impacts of complete emanci-
pation for a wide variety of alternative values ofϕ, holding all other parameters constant.
Economic output is measured in dollars per capita. The stars indicate the estimated value.
81
--- Page 83 ---
Figure B.7: Robustness of counterfactual results to alternative values ofθ
(a) Welfare impact of emancipa-
tion: Blacks
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity across locations (3)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
(b) Welfare impact of emancipa-
tion: Whites
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity across locations (3)
0.992
0.9925
0.993
0.9935
0.994
0.9945
(c) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Total GDP
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity across locations (3)
316.5
317
317.5
318
318.5
319
319.5
320
320.5
(d) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Agriculture
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity across locations (3)
135
135.5
136
136.5
137
137.5
138
(e) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Services
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity across locations (3)
104.8
104.9
105
105.1
105.2
105.3
105.4
(f) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Manufacturing
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity across locations (3)
76.75
76.8
76.85
76.9
76.95
77
Notes: This figure shows the aggregate welfare and economic impacts of complete emanci-
pation for a wide variety of alternative values ofθ, holding all other parameters constant.
Economic output is measured in dollars per capita. The stars indicate the estimated value.
82
--- Page 84 ---
Figure B.8: Robustness of counterfactual results to alternative values ofη
(a) Welfare impact of emancipa-
tion: Blacks
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Supply elasticity of substitution across sectors (2)
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
(b) Welfare impact of emancipa-
tion: Whites
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity within location across sectors (2)
0.989
0.99
0.991
0.992
0.993
0.994
0.995
0.996
(c) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Total GDP
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity within location across sectors (2)
318
318.05
318.1
318.15
318.2
318.25
318.3
318.35
(d) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Agriculture
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity within location across sectors (2)
136
136.2
136.4
136.6
136.8
137
137.2
(e) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Services
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity within location across sectors (2)
104.5
104.6
104.7
104.8
104.9
105
105.1
105.2
105.3
(f) Economic impact of emanci-
pation: Manufacturing
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6Labor supply elasticity within location across sectors (2)
76.65
76.7
76.75
76.8
76.85
76.9
76.95
77
77.05
Notes: This figure shows the aggregate welfare and economic impacts of complete emanci-
pation for a wide variety of alternative values ofη, holding all other parameters constant.
Economic output is measured in dollars per capita. The stars indicate the estimated value.
83
--- Page 85 ---
Figure B.9: Verifying County-Sector Wages: Literacy Rates
(a) Agriculture
5.65.75.85.966.1Log wage.5.6.7.8.91Literacy rate (b) Services
5.45.455.55.55Log wage.4.6.81Literacy rate
(c) Manufacturing
5.585.65.625.645.66Log wage.6.7.8.91Literacy rate
Notes: This figure shows the binscatter relationship across locations between the average
literacy rate of free persons employed in a given sector in a given county and the wages in
that sector×county, conditional on state fixed effects.
84
--- Page 86 ---
Figure B.10: Verifying County-Sector Wages: Per-capita Wealth
(a) Agriculture
5.45.65.866.26.4Log wage678910Log per capita wealth (b) Services
5.45.455.55.555.6Log wage456789Log per capita wealth
(c) Manufacturing
5.555.65.655.7Log wage56789Log per capita wealth
Notes: This figure shows the binscatter relationship across locations between the average
per capita wealth of free persons employed in a given sector in a given county and the wages
in that sector×county, conditional on state fixed effects.
85
--- Page 87 ---
Table B.1: Slave prices
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Cotton suitability 0.001** 0.001** 0.001**
(0.000) (0.000) (0.001)
Malaria suitability -3.014*** -3.274*** -3.397***
(0.822) (0.795) (0.778)
Log distance to North -0.001 -0.003 0.011
(0.028) (0.028) (0.028)
Slaveholdings share: Boys (<15) -0.537*** -0.478*** -0.609***
(0.031) (0.032) (0.019)
Slaveholdings share: Girls (<15) -0.404*** -0.353*** -0.479***
(0.033) (0.033) (0.022)
Slaveholdings share: Adult women (15-50) 0.044 0.089*** 0.026
(0.031) (0.033) (0.022)
Slaveholdings share: Elderly men (>50) -0.474*** -0.437*** -0.460***
(0.051) (0.053) (0.033)
Slaveholdings share: Elderly women (>50) -0.478*** -0.370*** -0.485***
(0.042) (0.047) (0.034)
Log slaveholder real estate value 0.073***
(0.011)
Slaveholder occupation FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
State FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
County FE No No No Yes
R-squared 0.127 0.134 0.116 0.259
Observations 3059679 3059679 2829138 3059679
Clusters 1082 1082 1082 1082
Notes: Ordinary least squares. The dependent variable is the (log) value of personal property
of the slave holder per enslaved person owned. Each observation is an enslaved person
in the U.S. South in the year 1860. When controlling for the demographic composition
of the slaveholder’s slave holdings, the omitted category is adult men, age 15-50. Cotton
suitabilityisthepredictedcottonyieldgivenagro-climaticconditionsinabsenceofirrigration
and fertilizer. Malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index developed by Kiszewski et al.
(2004). LogofdistancetonorthcalculatedusingVincentydistancebetweencountycentroids.
Standard errors two-way clustered at slaveholder and the county level are the reported in
parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
86
--- Page 88 ---
Table B.2: Cotton productivity and crop suitability
Measures of Cotton Production
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Cotton suitability 0.002*** 0.007** 0.002*** 0.003*** 0.007 0.011*
(0.000) (0.003) (0.001) (0.001) (0.005) (0.006)
Log distance North 0.078*** -1.305*** -0.101*** 0.031 -0.480*** 0.124
(0.016) (0.373) (0.035) (0.064) (0.185) (0.268)
Malaria suitability 2.947*** 41.757*** 10.987*** 14.910*** 41.373*** 58.606***
(0.551) (6.604) (1.797) (1.897) (8.547) (11.420)
Cotton y Any Log IHS IHS Level Level
State FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Lat–Lng. Poly No No No Yes No Yes
R-squared 0.527 0.414 0.559 0.597 0.331 0.357
Number of observations 973 580 970 970 970 970
Notes: Ordinary least squares. Each observation is a county. In column 1, the dependent
variable is an indicator for any cotton grown in the county; in column 2 the dependent
variable is the log of cotton yield per acre; in columns 3 and 4 the dependent variable is the
inverse hyperbolic sine of the cotton yield per acre; and in columns 5 and 6 the dependent
variable is the level of cotton yield. Cotton suitability is the predicted cotton yield given
agro-climatic conditions in the absence of irrigation and fertilizer. Malaria suitability is
the malaria ecology index developed by Kiszewski et al. (2004). Log distance north is the
Vincenty centroid distance from each county to the U.S. North. The Lat–Lng polynomial
indicates controls for a quadratic function of latitude and longitude. Robust standard errors
reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
87
--- Page 89 ---
Table B.3: Robustness of Stylized F acts to Geographic Controls
Log Worker Density Sh. Farmer Log (Slave Price/Free Wage)
(1) (2) (3)
Malaria Suitability 0.096 -2.883*** -9.755***
(2.015) (0.847) (1.787)
Malaria * Enslaved 17.164*** 1.065
(2.927) (0.764)
Cotton Suitability 0.004*** -0.000 0.001
(0.001) (0.000) (0.001)
Cotton * Enslaved 0.013*** 0.001***
(0.001) (0.000)
Log Distance North -0.092 0.096** 0.073
(0.081) (0.042) (0.049)
Log Distance North * Enslaved 0.704*** -0.027
(0.091) (0.029)
State-Slave FE Yes Yes No
County FE No No No
State-Sector FE No No Yes
Lat-Lng. Poly Yes Yes Yes
R-squared 0.530 0.050 0.448
Number of counties 973 990 955
Number of observations 1943 3441367 2555
Notes: Ordinary least squares. Each observation is a county-sector. In column 1, the
dependent variable is the (log) free wage; in column 2 the dependent variable is the (log)
slave price; and in column 3 the dependent variable is the (log) ratio of the slave price to
the free wage. Cotton suitability is the predicted cotton yield given agro-climatic conditions
in absence of irrigration and fertilizer. Malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index
developed by Kiszewski et al. (2004). Log distance north is the Vincenty centroid distance
from each county to the U.S. North. The Lat-Long polynomial indicates controls for a
quadratic function of latitude and longitude. Observations in column 1 are weighted by
the number of free workers. Observations in columns 2 and 3 are weighted by the number
of enslaved workers. Standard errors clustered at the county level reported in parentheses.
Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
88
--- Page 90 ---
Table B.4: Slave prices in Gallman-Parker Sample
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Slaveholdings share: Boys (<15) -0.616*** -0.597*** -0.605*** -0.585***
(0.090) (0.103) (0.086) (0.105)
Slaveholdings share: Girls (<15) -0.395*** -0.386*** -0.379*** -0.358***
(0.103) (0.096) (0.112) (0.095)
Slaveholdings share: Adult women (15-50) -0.047 -0.014 -0.026 0.022
(0.093) (0.094) (0.082) (0.096)
Slaveholdings share: Elderly men (>50) -0.400* -0.425*** -0.432* -0.441***
(0.212) (0.163) (0.207) (0.163)
Slaveholdings share: Elderly women (>50) -0.471*** -0.375** -0.446*** -0.355**
(0.123) (0.174) (0.132) (0.174)
Log slaveholder livestock value 0.072** 0.080***
(0.030) (0.025)
Log slaveholder equipment value -0.044 -0.018
(0.026) (0.021)
Slaveholder occupation FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
State FE Yes No Yes No
County FE No yes No yes
R-squared 0.092 0.313 0.096 0.323
Observations 2558 2403 2509 2357
Clusters 11 316 11 315
Notes: Ordinary least squares. The dependent variable is the (log) value of personal property
of the slave holder per enslaved person owned. Each observation is an enslaved person
in the U.S. South in the year 1860. When controlling for the demographic composition
of the slaveholder’s slave holdings, the omitted category is adult men, age 15-50. Cotton
suitabilityisthepredictedcottonyieldgivenagro-climaticconditionsinabsenceofirrigration
and fertilizer. Malaria suitability is the malaria ecology index developed by Kiszewski et al.
(2004). LogofdistancetonorthcalculatedusingVincentydistancebetweencountycentroids.
Standard errors two-way clustered at slaveholder and the county level are the reported in
parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
89
--- Page 91 ---
Table B.5: Markdown of enslaved wages, controlling for rations
(1) (2) (3)
Enslaved -0.103 -0.124*** 0.000***
(0.070) (0.000) (0.000)
Rations 0.342***
(0.002)
State FE Yes Yes Yes
Year X Month FE Yes Yes Yes
Occupation FE Yes Yes Yes
Fort FE Yes Yes Yes
Sample Monthly Monthy w/Rat. Monthy w/Rat.
R-squared 0.711 0.911 0.976
Number of forts 33 7 7
Number of workers 7576 332 332
Notes: Ordinary least squares. The dependent variable is the (log) wage. Each observation
is a worker contract; observations weighted by number of workers on a contract. Column 2 is
restricted to observations where rations are equal to 1 or 2 per month, and column 3 controls
for the number of rations in the contract. Standard errors clustered at the fort reported in
parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01.
90
--- Page 92 ---
Table B.6: Top Slaveholder Occupations by Number of Enslaved Workers
.
Slaveholder occ. Manuf. share Serv, share Agr. share Avg. slaves held
Farmers and planters 0.00 0.00 1.00 39.81 1058636
Physicians and surgeons 0.00 1.00 0.00 28.25 42783
Traders and dealers (NS) 0.00 1.00 0.00 19.00 35321
Lawyers 0.00 1.00 0.00 31.15 20192
Officials, industry NS 1.00 0.00 0.00 62.31 14177
Clergy 0.00 1.00 0.00 25.10 9996
Domestic servants 0.00 1.00 0.00 15.50 4161
Carpenters and joiners 1.00 0.00 0.00 15.37 4105
Officials of government 0.00 1.00 0.00 14.82 3597
Teachers and scientific persons 0.00 1.00 0.00 10.82 3412
Hotel keepers 0.00 1.00 0.00 11.87 2488
Traders and dealers in groceries 0.00 1.00 0.00 12.24 2378
Clerks in stores 0.00 1.00 0.00 10.35 2303
Blacksmiths 1.00 0.00 0.00 9.45 2211
Farm and plantation overseers 0.00 0.00 1.00 42.00 2158
Officials and employees of trade/trans. (NS) 0.00 1.00 0.00 52.08 2112
Plasterers 1.00 0.00 0.00 60.97 1992
Millers 1.00 0.00 0.00 12.72 1973
Traders and dealers in cigars and tobacco 0.00 1.00 0.00 31.66 1804
Agricultural laborers 0.00 0.00 1.00 21.49 1788
Notes: Each row is a slaveholder occupation.Count of enslaved is the number of individual enslaved-person observations linked to
holders in that occupation. Manufacturing/Services/Farmer share are means of the corresponding indicator at the enslaved-person
level within the occupation (interpret as shares).Avg. slaves held is the average slave holding size for slaveholders in the occupation.
91
--- Page 93 ---
Table B.7: Correlates of Enslaved Workers’ Occupations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Urban log(size) Non-Owner Hired Female Fem. SH Fug. Manu.
Manufacturing 0.066*** -0.522*** 0.011*** 0.068*** 0.005 -0.044*** 0.000 0.001
(0.004) (0.031) (0.003) (0.005) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003)
Services 0.086*** -0.428*** 0.010*** 0.014*** 0.040*** -0.034*** 0.003 -0.007***
(0.002) (0.013) (0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002)
Mean of dep. var. in agriculture 0.005 3.069 0.970 0.009 0.497 0.079 0.003 0.012
R-squared 0.433 0.271 0.190 0.145 0.004 0.029 0.004 0.036
Observations 1260139 1260139 1260139 1260139 1260139 1260139 1260139 1260139
Notes: Entries are coefficients with robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column is a
separate regression with county fixed effects.Mean of dep. var.is computed among enslaved
workers in agriculture within the estimation sample of each regression. Standard errors
clustered at the county level reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance:
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01. Stars indicate statistical significance: * p<.10 ** p<.05 ***
p<.01.
92