
--- Page 1 ---

--- Page 2 ---
CHAPTER FIVE

--- Page 3 ---
The Years of Miracles:  The Industrial  Revolution  1750-1830
By 1750, Europe had consolidated its technological superiority overthe rest of the world. Front the Bosporus to Tokyo Bay, the Orientalempires were falling behind by isolating themselves from the Westand experiencing a slowdown in their own technological progress.Some of theta, like India, were already coming under Westerndomination. Yet, it seems plausible that if European technology hadstopped dead in its tracks-as Islam’s had by about 1200, China’s hadby 1450, and Japan’s had by 1600-a global equilibrium would havesettled in that would have left the status quo intact, with fewexogenous forces to upset it. Instead, the last two centuries havebeen a period of ever accelerating change, a disequilibrium of’ epicproportions unlike anything that came before it. In two centuriesdaily life changed more than it had in the 7,000 years before. Thedestabilizing agent in this dizzying tale was technology, and Westerntechnology alone. Of’ course, technological progress did not start in1750, and the difference between the period after 1 750 and theperiod before it was one of degree; but degree was everything. Theeffects of the gains in productivity allowed Europe to expand itspopulation manifold in blatant defiance of Malthusian constraints; toprovide Europeans with a quality of life incomparably higher thanthat of traditional societies; to extend, for a while, political controlover most of mankind; and to reshape technology elsewhere in theEuropean image.
In recent years, the concept of the Industrial Revolution has comeunder serious scrutiny. Authors such as ,Jones (1988) have arguedthat there was little economic growth in Britain in the second half ofthe eighteenth century. Since it has been customary to identify theIndustrial Revolution with growth of per capita income (see E. A.Wrigley, 1987, for a recent restatement), the implication seems to bethat the concept of an Industrial Revolution is dispensable. Yetrecent calls to ban the concept from our research papers and lecturenotes seem misplaced, to say the least. The Industrial Revolutionwas not primarily a macroeconomic event that led to a suddenacceleration of the rate of growth, although growth eventuallybecame its inevitable corollary. The identification of the Industrial
--- Page 4 ---
Revolution with economic growth suffers from a number of seriousdefects. First and foremost, by focusing on a per capita variable itglosses over changes in a ratio, per capita income, in which both thenumerator (income) and the denominator (population size) wereincreasing more or less pari passu. As it happened, the years of theIndustrial Revolution were years of rapid population growth, and percapita changes were swamped by demographic changes. Second,economic growth need not be a result of industrial change at all; itcould be (and often was) rooted initially in agricultural orcommercial developments. Third, per capital income is notoriouslyhard to measure accurately during a period in which the economyundergoes rapid changes in the way its markets operate.Commercialization implies that goods previously produced byhouseholds are now purchased on the market. Unless meticulousadjustments are made, these changes tend to bias the measures ofeconomic growth. Furthermore, a second bias is introduced whentechnological change introduces new goods or improves the qualityof existing ones.
Thus, even if aggregate statistics do not reveal a sudden leap,there is room for the concept of an Industrial Revolution (Mokyr,1991). It is appropriate to think about the Industrial Revolutionprimarily in terns of accelerating and unprecedented technologicalchange. In the words of T. S. Ashton’s (1948, p. 42) famousschoolboy, it was first and foremost a “wave of gadgets” that sweptover Britain after 1760, a string of novel ideas and insights thatmade it possible to produce more and better goods and do so moreefficiently. To return to the terminology introduced earlier, aclustering of macroinventions occurred, leading to intensified workin improvement and adjustment, and thus creating a complementaryflow of microinventions. The result was a sharp increase in patentingactivity. Patent statistics do not permit us to distinguish betweenradical and minor inventions. The propensity to patent varied widelyfrom industry to industry, from location to location, and even fromindividual to individual (MacLeod, 1988, pp. 75-114). Yetdismissing the volume of patents altogether as an indicator ofinventive activity is premature. The sharp increase in the rate ofpatenting after 1760 requires an explanation (Sullivan, 1989).Something profound changed in the role of technology in the Britisheconomy around this time, although it is yet far- from clear whetherthe rise in patenting was a response to perceived needs andopportunities or a consequence of’ deeper change, affecting thetechnological creativity of Britain as it whole.
--- Page 5 ---
The Industrial Revolution is usually dated between about 1760and 1830. Britain is usually thought of as its locus, but a large part ofthe new technology was the result of work done in other Europeancountries and later in the United States. The fruits of the IndustrialRevolution were slow in corning. Per capita consumption and livingstandards increased little initially, but production technologieschanged dramatically in many industries and sectors, preparing theway for sustained Schumpeterian growth in the second half of’ thenineteenth century, when technological progress spread to previouslyunaffected industries. It is not easy to generalize about the kind of’technological change that occurred. Some scholars have proposedthat the main feature of technological change in this period was thesubstitution of’ inorganic for organic materials (E. A. Wrigley,1987). Others try to define the Industrial Revolution as an increasein energy inputs, especially inanimate energy, and focus on steampower as the most significant advance (Cipolla, 1965a). Still othersfocus on the use of machines instead of’ hand tools (Paulinyi, 1986).Yet these generalizations fail to do justice to the rich diversity of’progress in these yews. The growth of cotton at the expense of wooland linen, the improvements in the efficiency of waterpower, thedevelopment of’ gaslighting, the advances in the machine toolindustry, and the invention of food canning, to mention just a fewexamples, really share few common characteristics, save their abilityto increase both the quantity and quality of the supplies of goods andservices. As McCloskey (1981, p. 118) put it, the IndustrialRevolution was not the Age of Cotton, or the Age of Steam; it wasthe age of’ improvement. Yet improvement was not ubiquitous.Large sectors of’ the economy, employing the majority of’ the laborforce and accounting for at least half of’ gross national productwere, for all practical purposes, unaffected by innovation before themiddle of the nineteenth century. In services, construction, foodprocessing, and apparel making techniques changed little or not atall before 1850. The reason sonre industries changed and others didnot has little to do with either the demand side of the economy or thesupply of raw materials and coal. “technological opportunities andconstraints by and large determined where and when improvementswere to occur.
During the Industrial Revolution, technological progress wasusually the result of the joint and cumulative efforts of manyindividuals. A typical innovator in those years was it dexterous andmechan ically inclined person who became aware of a technicalproblem to be solved and guessed approximately how to go aboutsolving it. The successful inventors were those who put the pieces
--- Page 6 ---
together better than their colleagues, or those who managed toresolve one final stubborn difficulty blocking the realization of ‘anew technique.
It is useful to divide the technological changes during theIndustrial Revolution into four main groups: power technology,metallurgy, textiles, and a miscellaneous category of other industriesand services.
POWER TECHNOLOGY
The protestations of some economic historians notwithstanding, thesteam engine is still widely regarded as the quintessential inventionof the Industrial Revolution. Its background was not purely British;it is more accurate to think of it as the result of an international jointeffort. The basic idea for the construction of an atmospheric enginewas based on the realization that an atmosphere exists. What seemstoday a commonplace insight was the fruit of the work of Evange-lista Torricelli, a Student of Galileo’s, and Otto von Guericke, themayor of Magdeburg, famous for his experiment in which two teamsof horses could not separate two hemispheres enclosing a vacuum.[The existence of an atmosphere and its pressure may well have beenknown to the Chinese, but what followed in the second half of’ theseventeenth century was a typically European story. It occurred tomany who had grasped the newly discovered phenomenon that if avacuum could be created repeatedly, the force of atmosphericpressure could yield a novel source of power. The Marquis ofWorcester, among others, suggested in 1663 a machine utilizingcondensation for this purpose. The first known model was built in1691 by Denis Papin, an assistant to Christiaan Huygens, whoshowed in a prototype how a piston could be moved up and down acylinder using steam. Application to a useful purpose followed suit.‘T’homas Savery built the first working steam engine in 1698,though this device was really a suction pump that condensed steamin a closed vessel and sucked up the water by means of the vacuum.A different version was perfected in the first decade of’ theeighteenth century by Thomas Newcomen, who, unlike Savery, usedatmospheric pressure in a ma chine that was alternately heated andcooled, so as to create repeated vacua by condensation. The firsteconomically successful engine, known as the Dudley CastleMachine, was installed in a coal mine near Wolverhampton in 1712.Newcomen’s engine was far more complex and sophisticated thanPapin’s prototype, yet it was within the ability of the craftsmen of’the time and it was sate. It was powerful enough to pump water out
--- Page 7 ---
of mines, and despite its awkward dimensions, its voracious appetitefor fuel, and the difficulty early eighteenth-century mechanics had inachieving hermetic sealing, the Newcomen machine was widelyadopted. Within a few years of- its inception, it spread to France,Germany, and Belgium, and by 1730 it was operating in Spain,Hungary, and Sweden and later in the American colonies. Themachine solved drainage problems in the Cornish tin mines, as wellas in the deep coal mines in the north of’ England. But above all, itwas the first economically useful transformation of thermal energy(heat) into kinetic energy (work).2
Yet the steam engine will forever remain associated with the nameof,James Watt. The basic improvement that Watt introduced was toseparate the condenser from the piston cylinder, so that the lattercould he kept hot constantly. This separation greatly reduced the fuelrequirements of the machine and permitted it to be used almostanywhere. Wait’s ingenuity provided many further improvements oilthe steam engine, including, steam-jacketing, to keep the cylinderhot; a transmission mechanism known as the “sun-and-planets”gears, which converted the reciprocating motion of the atmosphericengine to the rotative motion needed in textile mills and otherindustrial applications; and a parallel motion gear that allowed steamto be introduced alternately info both ends of the cylinder, thuscreating it doubleacting engine that Utilized the push as well as thepull of the end of’ its bean. ‘I’ll(- double-acting expansion machineused the steam above the piston to drive it down, but cut off thesteam after the piston had moved part of the way in order to savefuel. As a result, fuel efficiency was raised from less than 1 percentin the Newcomer engine to around 4.5 percent in Watt’s design. Theprinciple of doubleacting engines had been known in Europe sincethe fifteenth cen tury, and used in pumps and bellows, but the steamengine was by far its most successful application (Reti, 1970). Theutilization of the expansive power of steam was regarded by Usher(1954, p. 354) as the difference between an atmospheric and agenuine steam engine. Equally important was the “governor” forregulating the speed of engines, which foreshadowed twentieth-century feedback servomechanisms, which form the basis forcybernetics. The device consisted of two balls that were pushedoutward when the speed of op eration increased and that lifted anarm attached to the valve in the steampipe. Similar automaticregulators had been applied earlier to windmills, but Watt’sinvention symbolizes the desire for full control and automation thatincreasingly permeated the techniques of the time.
--- Page 8 ---
Figure 22. Rough sketch by Christian Huygens of his gunpowder-fueled internal combustion engine.
Source: Chr. Huygens, Oeuvres completes, 1763.
Watt’s work, which combined inventive genius with a desire tocut costs, minimize wear and tear, and extract “the last drop of`duty’ from the last puff of steam in his engine” (Cardwell, 1972, p.93), was paradigmatic of the kind of mind that helped make theIndustrial Revolution. Watt himself, in his oddly written third personautobiography, wrote that “his mind ran upon making engines cheapas well as good.” The search for economic value in addition tofunctionality and beauty represents the culmination of a millenniumof de velopment of European technological rationality. Yetrationality meant nothing without technical ability, and Watt’smechanical talents bordered on the virtuoso. In short, in the history
--- Page 9 ---
of power technology, Watt is comparable to, say, Pasteur in biology,Newton in physics, or Beethoven in music. Some individuals didmatter. We should bear in mind, however, that Watt stood on theshoulders of Papin and Newcomen; of John Wilkinson, whose newboring machines supplied Boulton & Watt with cylinders of greataccuracy; and of his partner Matthew Boulton, with whom Wattformed a classic inventorentrepreneur team (Scherer, 1984, pp. 8-31). The steam engine became a familiar sight in eighteenth-centuryBritain. It is now reckoned that close to 2,500 engines were built inthe eighteenth century, of which about 30 percent were made byWatt, by far the largest producer (Kanefsky and Robey, 1980). Themost important user of steam power was mining, with 828 enginesin collieries and another 209 in copper and lead mines by 1800.
Figure 23. Diagram of Newcomen’s atmospheric engine.
Source: From H. W. Dickinson. “A Short History of the SteamEngine,” Fig. 7. Cambridge University Press, 1939.
--- Page 10 ---
Watt’s patent expired in 1800, and a new genius applied himself tothe construction of a revolutionary steam engine. Watt had felt that ahigh-pressure machine-already suggested by Savery-was toodangerous to be practical. But in 1802 another Englishman, RichardTrevithick, built a machine that created pressure ten times as high asthe atmosphere. These high-pressure machines were smaller in sizeand more economical than Watt’s engines. In the mines of Cornwall,high-pressure engines were applied with success to the beam enginepumps used for drainage, known as “Cornish” engines. Moreover,these engines could be placed on boats and horseless carriages. Asteamboat prototype was built by the Marquis de Jouffroy in Francein 1783 and by John Fitch and James Rumsay in the United States in1787. It was made practical by the American Robert Fulton in 1807.Within ten years Fulton’s boats were dominated by highpressureengines, pioneered in the United States by Oliver Evans (Hindle,1981, p. 55). Meanwhile, the Watt low-pressure stationary enginealso underwent improvements, and the two types existed side by sidethroughout the nineteenth century.
The next step in the development of steam power wascompounding, that is, the use of the same steam in more than onecylinder, one of which is high pressure. In these engines, after thesteam does its duty in the high-pressure cylinder, it is admitted into alarger cylinder, where it drives down a piston using the principle ofexpansions The first successful application of compound engineswas made by Arthur Woolf in England in 1803. Compoundingbecame practical only in 1845, when John McNaught (after whomthe verb “Mcnaughting” was coined) perfected the process. Theadvantage of compounding was fuel saving: Woolf’s compoundengine raised fuel efficiency to 7.5 percent (compared to 4.5 percentin Watt’s engines), and the sophisticated Corliss compound steamengine of 1878 had a thermal efficiency of over 17 percent.
--- Page 11 ---
Figure 24. Principles of early steam engines: (a) Papin’s prototype,(b) Savery’s pistonless suction pump, (c) Newcornen’s engine, and(d) Watt’s doubleacting engine. The machine exploits the contrarymotion of the piston and the slide-valve above it, with the steamentering alternately from the left and the right.
Source: Umberto F.co and G. B. Zorzoli, The Picture History ofInventions. © Gruppo Editoriale Fabbr: Bompiani Sonzongo EtasS.p.A.
The success of the steam engine preceded the establishment of ascience that formalized the principles upon which it was based. In1824, the Frenchman Sadi Carnot, upon observing a working steam
--- Page 12 ---
engine and asking himself why high-pressure engines were superior,developed the kernel of what was later to be known as thernrody-namics. Carnot also maintained that “to take away England’s steamengines today would amount to robbing her of her iron and coal, todrying up her sources of wealth, to ruining her means of prosperityand destroying her great power” (cited in Cardwell, 1972, p. 130).Economic historians would probably disagree. The assessment of thecontribution of the steam engine should not be based on the grossachievements of the steam engines, but on the marginal contributionof steam over its next best alternative.
That next best alternative was waterpower, still an importantsource of power in Britain in 1830, and the dominant source ofenergy in Switzerland and New England at that time. The gains thatthe steam engine provided relative to waterpower before 1850 werefairly small (von Tunzelmann, 1978, pp. 285-92), but this should nottake away from the achievement of the people who made theIndustrial Revolution. Indeed, it confirms it, because the slowdiffusion of steam power in many places is explained byimprovements in the efficiency of waterpower. In other words, thewide range of progress in power technology was responsible for therelatively slow growth of one specific technique. This wasparticularly true for the European continent and New England. Theimprovements in waterpower after 1750 were associated withconstant improvements in the understanding of the theory ofhydraulics. The most important advance was the breast wheel, whichwas introduced by John Smeaton in the 1750s and soon spread allover Britain. Breast wheels receive water at an intermediate pointbetween the summit and the bottom of the wheel, and thus in a senseare a compromise between overshot and undershot wheels. Thebreast wheel was as efficient as the overshot wheel, but had theadvantage that the wheel turned in the same direction as the flow ofwater in the tail race, which allowed it to work under floodingconditions. Smeaton’s work was improved by the introduction of thesliding hatch, introduced by John Rennie in the 1780s, whichallowed the breast wheels to adapt to varying water levels. Later itwas discovered that efficiency could be further improved by settingthe blades such that they entered the water at an angle of 45 degreesto the surface (Daumas and Gille, 1979a, p. 28). Like the engineersworking on steam engines, their colleagues working on the“traditional” technology were determined to extract as much energyas possible from every moving drop of water. In the nineteenthcentury, waterwheels were increasingly made of’ iron parts, whichreduced wear and tear. Smeaton, Rennie, and their colleagues were
--- Page 13 ---
practical engineers, not scientists, and Smeaton was known for hisdistrust of scientific theory. This distrust was not altogethermisplaced: it was not until the 1750s that scientists realized thatdifferent principles applied to the gravity-driven wheels of overshotmills and the impulse-driven wheels of undershot mills. For a longtime, practical men without formal training in hydraulics keptsnaking the important improvements.
Across the Channel, French engineers were equally successful.Jean Charles Borcla was the first to attack the theoretical problemsof waterpower in 1766, though his work was too abstract to he ofimme diate use and was not recognized until after 1810 (Reynolds,1979). Jean Victor Poncelet used Borda’s ideas to modify theundershot waterwheel to build the famous Poncelet waterwheel(1823), which used curved blades and fed the water through aninclined haute. The so-called column of water or water-pressureengine, extensively employed on the Continent, ingeniouslycombined the idea of it Newcomen engine with the pressure of’water (rather than the atmosphere). Waterpower technology wasfurther advanced by the invention of’ the water turbine. The ideaoriginated in the eighteenth century with Leonhard Euler, the Swissmathematician, who, together with his son Johann, showed that byusing the force of water coming out of the varies of a waterwheel,the entire energy of’ the flow could be converted into useful work.The difference between this concept and the waterwheel is that inthe latter the water does not move relative to the buckets or vanes,while in the former the power is derived from the water flowingrapidly through curved passages driving the engine. The practicalimplementation of the idea took many years of tedious work bymany engineers (mostly in France), culminating in the success of theFrenchman Benoit Fourneyron in 1837. The turbine was introducedinto the New England textile industry and “delayed for decades thedominance of’ steam power in that industry” (Rae, 1967b, p. 338).By this tittle, advances in waterpower technology had been soimpressive that one historian notes that in theory, and to a largeextent in practice, engineers had complete command overwaterpower (Cardwell, 1971, p. 184). Nonetheless, the utilizationof’ waterpower remained constrained, not so much by the watermills themselves as by the lack of a scientific understanding ofwatershed hydrology and the requisite data on rainfall (Gordon,1985).
--- Page 14 ---
Figure 25. Comparison of high breast waterwheel (left) andtraditional Waterwheel (on the right). Note that in the breast-wheelthe water moves in the same direction as the wheel, in contrast withthe traditional wheel.
Source: F. Redtenbacher, Theorie and Ban der Wasserrader(Mannheim: Friedrich Bas- serman, 1846), p1. 1, Figs. 5-6.
The Industrial Revolution was an age of’ power technology, andthe prospects must have seemed unlimited. The economic impact ofthe steam engine during the Industrial Revolution may not have beeninitially as large as Carnot thought, but in the second half of thenineteenth century steam power penetrated every aspect of economiclife in the Western world and beyond. In conjunction with otherinventions, power technology created the gap between Europe andthe rest of the world, a temporary disequilibrium that allowed theEuropeans to establish global political and military domination.
METALLURGY
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, metallurgy had been an empiricaland experimental art in which gifted amateurs and semiprofessionalstried to solve complex chemical and physical problems that baf fledthose engaged in the day-to-clay manufacture of metals. “theirsuccess is a monument to their determination to produce materialsthat satisfied their needs better and more cheaply. Among thesematerials, iron ruled supreme. There were no substitutes for it interms of durability, versatility, and malleability. We have seen thatthe later Middle Ages witnessed the development of cast iron, whichhas a relatively high carbon content and a low melting point. It wasbrittle and hard, and could therefore not he shaped using theblacksmith’s traditional tools, but it could be cast to make pots,
--- Page 15 ---
ovens, and cannon. Most products, including machine parts, nails,locks, and tools, needed to be shaped in forges, and for thesewrought iron was needed. The process of turning pig iron, the outputof blast furnaces, into wrought it-on remained it major bottleneck inthe metal industry. During the eighteenth century an extensive searchwas conducted into this problem in Britain. The Wood brotherspioneered the socalled potting process, Using crucibles, or “pots,” toheat the pig iron (Hyde, 1977, pp. 83-88). The problem’s ultimatesolution by Henry Cort in 1784 was it skillful combination of anumber of’ elements, such as the coal-burning reverberatory furnacethat had been used in glassinaking for it long time, and the rollingof’ heated metal using grooved rollers. Cort’s puddling and rollingprocess was typical of many great inventions of the IndustrialRevolution in that it was the culmination of it dispersed and drawnout search for the solution of a difficult but economic-ally’ importantproblem. After several improvements in the late 1780s, Cort’sprocess took the British world of metallurgy by storm. The smallindependent forge, until then the source of’ all wrought iron,vanished, to be replaced by the larger puddling furnaces. The supplyof high quality and cheap wrought iron grew dramatically, makingiron almost literally the building block of the Industrial Revolution.
The eighteenth century also witnessed another inventioncomparable in fame: the use of’ coke in blast furnaces. Coke ispurified bituminous coal, and its use in smelting was pioneered byAbraham Darby. Coke had been employed earlier in industry, but itsuse in blast furnaces dates from about 1709. New research on theiron industry has refuted the widespread myth that coke smeltingwas triggered by a scarcity of wood, and that the diffusion of, theinvention was impeded by the secrecy of the ironmaster’s family(Flinn, 1978; Hyde, 1977, pp. 25-29). The simple problem was thatfor a long time coked iron contained silicone, which made it morecostly to convert coked pig iron into wrought iron (Fylecote, 1976,pp. 108-9). The growth of coking after 1750 has been explained byfurther technological progress, especially I)arby’s son’s success inremelting the pig iron in a so-called foundry furnace, to remove thesilicone. Other improvements included the making of cokes inclosed ovens shaped like beehives, and the replacement of old-fashioned bellows by new waterpowered blowing cylinders,invented around 1760 by the versatile John Smeaton. Between 1760and 1790, coke replaced charcoal in British iron smelting and wasgradually introduced on the Continent. Blast furnaces became biggerand more efficient, pro ducing better-quality iron at lower prices.Another major breakthrough was achieved by the Scotsman James
--- Page 16 ---
Neilson, who hit upon the idea of using the blast furnace’s owngases to preheat the air inside (1829). The hot blast procedure wascheap to install and simultaneously reduced fuel requirements by afactor of three. It created temperatures hot enough to use fuels otherthan coked bituminous coal, such as anthracite. Between 1828 and1840, Scottish producers experienced a cost-reduction of almost twothirds, but as the technique spread through Britain, pig iron pricesfell, and profits with them (Hyde, 1977, pp. 151-52). It was thisprocess that made it possible to exploit the black-band iron oredeposits in Scotland and allowed Scotland to compete with theBlack Country (in the English Midlands) and Wales in pig ironproduction.
--- Page 17 ---
Figure 26. Section of Cort’s puddling furnace, which producedwrought iron.
Source: Archibald Clow and Nan L. Clow, The ChemicalRevolution, Batchworth Press.
The product that resisted innovation most stubbornly was steel.Chemically, steel is an intermediate product, hallway between thealmost carbonless wrought iron and high-carbon pig iron. Steel canbe made from iron by adding carbon to low-carbon wrought iron(cementation or carburization); by removing carbon from high-carbon cast iron (decarburization); or by mixing high and lowcarbon scraps of iron together (cofusion). A fourth process produced
--- Page 18 ---
steel directly front ore by packing it in crucibles with pieces ofspecial wood. This last product, known as zvootz steel, originated inIndia (in Hyderabad). The desirable physical properties of* steel(resilience, tenacity, and flexibility) made it ideal for razors,weapons, shears, springs, and machine parts, but it was prohibitivelyexpensive. In the West, steel was produced by cementation, itprocess first known in Asia Minor around 1000 B.C. The productionof’ this “blister steel” entailed “baking” the wrought iron by heatingit in direct contact with charcoal and hammering it for long periodsto spread the carbon through the metal. The blast furnace offerednew opportunities for making steel by refining the high-carbon castiron, or by immersing pieces of low-carbon wrought iron in moltencast iron. Furthermore, ores high in manganese allowed it bettercontrol of the carbon removal, so that some residual of carbon couldhe left in the iron. By the seventeenth century, Europeans hadlearned that steel could be improved by remelting and hammeringsmall pieces of it at very high temperatures, thus spreading thecarbon somewhat more evenly. The production of’ high-quality steelwas perfected in about 1740 by Benjamin Huntsman, who used cokeand reverberatory ovens to generate sufficiently high temperatures toenable him to heat blister steel to its melting point. In this way heproduced a crucible, or cast, steel that was soon in high demand byinstrument- and clockmakers. The importance of crucible steel wasthat it could be cast, and eventually the production of larger ingotsbecame possible through the coordinated operation of’ manycrucibles. The German steel manufacturer Alfred Krupp pioneeredthese techniques in the casting of” steel cannon. His six-pounder wasone of the great sensations of the Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851,as was a gigantic steel casting weighing 4,300 Ib. Yet steel remainedtoo expensive to be of widespread use during the critical years of theIndustrial Revolution. Wrought iron rather than steel was the mainmaterial until 1860.
TEXTILES
The central technical problem in textiles was that of spinning. Sincetime immemorial, the crucial operating part in the spinning processhad been the human finger, the thumbs and index fingers of millionsof women who gave the raw material in the rovings the “twist” thatmade it into yarn. The spinning wheel increased the efficiency of thespinner’s work, but did not replace the human finger as the tool thattransformed the material. The search for it replacement for humanfingers in cotton spinning was taken up by Lewis Paul, anEnglishman who pioneered the idea of’ using rollers to replace the
--- Page 19 ---
fingers in drafting out the fibers. His patent was taken out in 1738,but it is Richard Arkwright to whom the mechanization of spinningis usually credited, more than 30 years later. Arkwright’s machine,the “throstle” or “water frame,” differed from Paul’s in one respect:he used two pairs of rollers moving at different speeds and separatedby a distance about equal to the length of the longest fiber to bespun. The result was that Arkwright’s machine worked, whereasPaul’s did not. The water frame was incapable of spinning the fineryarns, as these would have snapped when they were wound on thebobbins.
The water frame was complemented by another invention, thespinning jenny, which was patented it year after the throstle, butactually invented in 1764. Its inventor, James Hargreaves, reputedlyhit upon the idea after watching a spinning wheel fall on its side andcontinue to spin for it few more seconds. He realized that it waspossible to “draft against the twist,” that is, to impart the twist not bythe movement of the fingers but by the correct turning of the wheelitself. The jenny twisted the yarn by rotating spindles that pulled therovings from their bobbins, with metal draw bars playing the role ofhuman fingers guiding the spun yarn onto the spindles by means of afaller wire. Instead of the single spindle turned by the spinningwheel, Hargreaves’ machine used many spindles and thus allowed alarge number of threads to be spun at the same time. The quality ofthe yarn was rather uneven, however, and it was suitable Only forweft. Moreover, the jenny was an extremely uncomfortable machineto work with, forcing adult spinners to bend over nearly double(Hills, 1979). Combining the throstle’s rollers with the multiplespindles of the jenny led to the mule, the ultimate spinning machine,invented by Samuel Crompton in 1779. One of the most famousinventions of all times, the mule consisted of a carriage that wasdriven back and forth. In so doing, the spindles mounted on it turnedquickly and together with the rollers imparted the twist on the yarn,which could then be wound on bobbins. At no stage was the yarnsubjected to much strain, and thus the chances for breaking weremuch reduced. The mule could thus make cotton yarn that was bothcheaper and finer, stronger, and more uniform than hitherto. As aresult, cotton became a growth industry the like of which no one hadever seen. Until Crompton, the cotton yarn spun in England was notstrong enough to serve as warp and hence cotton was used incombination with other yarns. The mule made all-cotton clothpossible. It was especially suitable for finer yarn; coarse yarnscontinued to be spun by jennies for a long time, as they werecheaper and could be readily used in domestic industry. Spinning
--- Page 20 ---
jennies, water frames, and mules were all tried in domestic industry,but soon the factory was found to be a more congenial location forthe new spinning technology (Landes, 1986). Nonetheless, it is notwarranted to associate the Industrial Revolution with the rise of thefactory system; domestic industry, too, experienced some measure oftechnological progress, some of it in symbiosis with the factories.
Figure 27. The mechanical principle behind the Wyatt-Paul spinningmachine, and Arkwright’s throstle.
Source: ll. S. L. Cardwell, Turning Points in Western Technology,Science History Publications.
--- Page 21 ---
Modifications in spinning were subsequently introduced, but themain breakthroughs had been achieved by 1780. Application ofsteam power to the new machine followed in the 1780s, althoughanimaland waterpower dominated in the early years. The self-actingmule, patented by Richard Roberts (an improved version wasbrought out in 1830) was a triumph of British engineering, in thewords of Mann (1958, p. 290) “an almost perfect machine.” Theself-actor made the movements of the carriage which pulled andwound the yarn automatic, so that the operator who moved it and putthe faller wire in place became unnecessary. Yet despite its obviousadvantages, it was adopted so slowly that the patent authoritiesdecided to extend the patent by another seven years. One reasonseems to have been that self-actors were expensive, and sources oflong-term credit for fixed capital were scarce. Second, the self actorswere better suited for coarse (low-count) yarns until about 1860.Third, the structure of the labor force established on the commonmules, in which a male “minder” carried out certain managerial andsupervisory functions, may have had a momentum of its own as theminders had an obvious interest to resist the introduction of a devicethat would weaken their authority in the workplace because it turnedthe spinner from a skilled operator into little more than a machinetender. The invention of the self-actor was directly aimed at reducingthe bargaining power of these workers, something in which it wasunsuccessful (Lazonick, 1979). Thus a limit was imposed on the costsaving made possible by the self-actor, slowing down its diffusion.Some idea of the magnitude of the improvements attained can begained from Chapman’s (1972) calculations of the number of hoursneeded to spin 100 lbs. of cotton. The “old” technology was theIndian handspinner, who took about 50,000 hours. Arkwright’srollers and the mule brought that number down to around 300 hoursin the 1790s, and the self-actor reduced the figure to 135.
Although the improvements in spinning were the mostspectacular, improvements in other stages of cotton production werealso impressive. The cotton gin, invented by Eli Whitney in 1793,ensured the supply of cheap raw cotton to Britain’s mills. A cardingmachine was patented by Lewis Paul in 1742 and later improved byArkwright, who pioneered the use of large rollers to prepare therovings for the water frame. The finished yarn was bleached usingchlorine, a process invented in 1784 by the French chemist ClaudeL. Berthollet and improved in 1799 by Charles Tennant bycombining chlorine with slaked lime to make bleaching powder.Chlorine bleaching meant a fundamental change in process, as itworks through oxygenation rather than washing of the color
--- Page 22 ---
products, and historians of the chemical industry assessed that “inthe last quarter of the eighteenth century, no greater advance wasmade in the finishing sections of the textile trade than the art ofbleaching” (Clow and Clow, 1952, p. 186). In 1783 Thomas Bellinvented metal printing cylinders that printed patterns on thefinished cloth. Edward Baines, one of the earliest historians of theBritish cotton industry, judged that Bell’s cylinder printing bore thesame relation to block printing (the manual technique used until thenin the calico printing industry) as throstle spinning did to thespinning wheel (Baines, 1835, p. 265). In weaving, the introductionof machines was slower. Initially improvements took place largely inthe equipment used in domestic industry, which explains the longprosperity and survival of the domestic handloom weavers. Thedandy loom, patented by Thomas Johnson in 1805, moved the clothbeam automatically, speeding up the weaving process with no extraeffort. The first power loom was built in 1785 by EdmundCartwright, an enterprising and idealistic clergyman, but themachine (lid not work properly until about 1815, and the finer yarns(which were more subject to breakage) were not woven by powerlooms until the 1830s.
Figure 28. Side view of Richard Robert’s self-acting mule.
Sourre: W. S. Murphy. The Textile Industries Vol. 3, Fig. 130.London, Gresham, 1910. E. Norman.
“Thus, during the brief period between 1760 and 1800, a feverishwave of inventions focused on the manufacturing of’ cotton. Cottoncombined qualities that are attractive to both consumers andproducers: it takes dyes well, launders easily, and ventilates muchbetter than linen and wool. Compared to its main competitors, wool
--- Page 23 ---
and linen, cotton fibers lent themselves easily to mechanization.Moreover, the supply of the raw material was elastic. No wonder,then, that cotton grew at a rate never before witnessed in textiles,and is regarded as the quintessential growth industry of the earlystages of the Industrial Revolution.
Since the sixteenth century the English woolen industry hadconsisted of two branches, the woolens and the worsteds. Thepreliminary combing of the wool in worsted production was theslowest to become mechanized. Although a number of patents weretaken out on combing machines, successful combing machines werenot available before 1827 and not perfected until Josue Heilmann, aFrenchman, patented his combing machine in 1845. On the otherhand, Arkwright’s double-roller device was well-suited to thespinning of worsted yarns. In wool the order of mechanization wasreversed: preparation was mechanized before spinning. Water-drivencarding machines were operating in Yorkshire in the 1770s, whereasthe adaptation of the mule to the spinning of wool was not achievedsatisfactorily until 1816. In weaving, power looms were applied toworsteds after 1820, but the diffusion of these machines was slowerthan in cotton. In wool, the yarns were too fragile for the powerlooms, and mechanization did not occur until the 1840s. Handloomweavers in the woolen industry survived longer than in cotton orworsteds. In the finishing processes of the woolen industry,innovation encountered some resistance, but here too mechanizationproved inevitable.
Like silk, worsteds were a delicate and relatively up-market fabricwoven into patterns using the so-called Jacquard loom, one of themost sophisticated technological breakthroughs of the time. TheJacquard loons was perfected in 1801 by Joseph Marie Jacquard, aLyons silk weaver, following a century of efforts by Frenchinventors to devise a loom that could automatically weave patternsinto fabric (Usher, 1954, pp. 288-95).5 The patterns were coded oncards by means of holes representing the information in a binarycode. The cards were probed by rods connected to wires,transmitting the information embedded in them. The Jacquard loomsaved labor, as the draw boy was replaced by an automatic device,and it made the design of brocades much easier, permitting theweaving of more varied and richer patterns. Moreover, it eliminatedthe frequent and costly errors made by traditional draw looms.Despite resistance among French weavers, the jacquard loom spreadrapidly in the Lyons region. A decade after its invention, 11,000such looms were operating in France. After 1820, its diffusion in
--- Page 24 ---
Britain began, accelerating in the late 1830s (Rothstein, 1977).6Apart from the Jacquard loom, the silk industry changed little. Silkthrowing, once the most mechanically progressive of all textileindustries, experienced no progress, and by 1825 was regarded asbackward (English, 1958, p. 311).
Figure 29. Cylinder printing press for the printing of calicoes,invented by Thomas Bell in 1785.
Source: Archibald Clow and Nan L. Clow, The ChemicalRecoln[iOa, Batchworth Press, London.
--- Page 25 ---
Figure 30. Stages in the development of the Jacquard Loom: (1) isthe Falcon paper roll, (2) de Vaucanson’s cylinder and (3) Jacquard’sendless chain of cards. The control mechanism is shown in thecenter.
S nir e: Macmillan London Dd.
In the ancient and venerable linen industry, mechanization provedto be difficult. In flax, the filaments contain a rubbery substance thatneeds to be dissolved before spinning can take place. The search wasintensified during the Napoleonic Wars, when the Continental textileindustries were cut off from their sources of raw cotton supply.Napoleon, who had a keen interest in industry, offered a large fi-naricial reward to the inventor who would do for linen whatArkwright and Crompton had done for cotton. In 1810 theFrenchman Philippe de Girard perfected the idea of “wet spinning,”soaking the raw flax in a hot alkaline solution before it went to the
--- Page 26 ---
spindles. This idea was introduced in Leeds in 1825, and themechanization of linen spinning spread rapidly. The preparatorystages of flax processing, such as the scutching and heckling of thematerial (roughly corresponding to carding in wool or cotton, orcombing in worsteds), which had been a highly labor-intensivecottage industry, were mechanized in the 1830s, though the finestyarns remained those heckled by hand. Moreover, the adaptation ofthe power loom to linen weaving was difficult because the lack ofelasticity in linen caused the yarn to snap under strain. As late as1850, there were only slightly over 1,000 power looms weavinglinen in the United Kingdom, as opposed to 42,000 in wool andworsted and a quarter of a million in cotton. The technologicaldifficulties in mechanizing the manufacture of linen cloth led to thesharp decline of this industry, with devastating effects on regionsthat had historically specialized in it, such as Ireland and WesternBelgium.
MISCELLANEOUS TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS
Among the factors responsible for making the Industrial Revolutionpossible in the late eighteenth century rather than a century or twoearlier must surely be the existence of a small but vital high-precision machine-tool making industry. In 1774, john Wilkinsonpatented a machine, originally designed to bore cast-iron cannon, inwhich the drill and material were independently manipulated. Thistechnique greatly increased accuracy, and within two years he washired by Boulton and Watt to finish cylinders and condensers. It isonly a mild exaggeration to say that Wilkinson and his colleagues,by actually being able to manufacture the required parts as specifiedby the inventor, made the difference between Watt and Trevithick onthe one hand and Leonardo Da Vinci on the other. Machine toolssuch as planing machines, milling machines, lathes, screw-cuttingmachines, and so on permitted the creation of precise geometricmetal forms, essential to machinemaking and uniformity. It was, inthe words of’ one technological historian (Paulinyi, 1986, p. 277),“the most important step on the way to the production of machinesby machines … it [became] possible to use iron and steel as thematerial whenever it appeared functional to do so.”
Unlike in textiles, the masters of the engineering and machinetoolindustries were a closely knit group, whose members taught eachother the secrets of the trade. Father-and-son dynasties, such asGeorge and Robert Stephenson or Marc and Isambard Brunel, werecomplemented by master-and-apprentice dynasties. The most
--- Page 27 ---
famous example of’ the latter was the one started by JosephBrarnah, who had eighteen patents to his name, including animproved water closet, a wood-planing machine, sophisticated locks,and a spring-winding machine. In 1797, Bramah’s foreman, HenryMaudslay, left the firm to start out on his own, devising a screw-cutting lathe that produced screws with unprecedented accuracy andat an affordable price. He built numerous machine tools used forplaning, sawing, boring, mortising, and so on (Woodbury, 1972).The famous Portsmouth blockmaking machines, devised byMaudslay together with Marc Brunel around 1801 to producewooden gears and pulleys for the British Navy, were automatic andin their close coordination and fine division of labor, resembled amodern mass-production process in which a labor force of tenworkers produced a larger output than the traditional technique thathad employed more than 10 times as many (Cooper, 1984).Maudslay in his turn trained three other toolmakers-Richard Roberts,James Nasmyth, and Joseph Whitworth-all of whom made majorcontributions to the machine-tool industry. Nasmyth invented thesteam hammer and milling and planing machines. Whitworth had nofewer than 23 exhibits at the famous Crystal Palace Exhibition of1851 where the glories of British engineering were extolled. To hiscredit are, among others, a measuring machine that could measureup to one millionth of an inch and the standardization of screwthreads. Richard Roberts was one of the most brilliant engineers ofhis time, making fundamental contributions to half a dozeninventions, including a multiple-spindle drilling machine controlledby a binary logic mechanism similar to that used in the Jacquardloom. Roberts’s improvements to Cartwright’s power loom helpedtransform it from a curiosum invented by a well-meaning eccentricinto the backbone of’ the British cotton industry (and the (loom ofBritain’s handloom weavers). His most famous inven tion was theself-actor (1830), which, as we have seen, wholly automated themule-spinning process.
Other machine-tool makers, not all associated directly with theBramah “dynasty,” deserve mention. In 1763 Jesse Ramsden built adividing machine for the accurate graduation of circles, crucial to theconstruction of navigational and surveying instruments. MatthewMurray and Bryan Donkin also contributed to the design ofimproved machine tools. William Fairbairn, a producer of improvedwaterwheels, steamboats, and boilers, was a worthy heir to JohnSmeaton. In the United States, Eli Whitney, John Hall, SimeonNorth, Thomas Blanchard, and others pioneered new machine tools,
--- Page 28 ---
paving the way eventually for the American System ofinterchangeable parts.
In the ceramics industries, the location and timing oftechnological change were quite different than in textiles andmetallurgy. Here the Continent played a major role, and manyimportant technical developments occurred before 1750. In theseventeenth century Dutch craftsmen, struggling to imitate Chineseblue and white porcelain, hit upon the processes of making the tin-and-enamel wares for which Delft is famous. Porcelain wasproduced successfully in 1708 by J. F. Bottger, who was employedby August the Strong, Prince-Elector of Saxony. Dresden chinawarewas made in Meissen, using a technique that was kept secret by theSaxons. It took the rest of the Continent several decades before theywere able to copy the process. England came up with a closesubstitute in the salt-glazed earthenwares produced by John Astburyof Staffordshire in about 1720. By 1759, when the renowned JosiahWedgwood started his factory in Bur- slem, he could draw upon avenerable tradition of making an excellent product. In the precedingcentury, the British pottery industry had adopted coal as it fuel formost purposes, as well as new raw materials, such as ball clay andflint. Wedgwood is justly famous for his rationalization ofproduction employing steam engines, his use of a fine division oflabor, and his ability to market a relatively inexpensive product tosnobbish consumers, competing successfully with the moreexpensive hard-paste porcelains made on the Continent. Wedgwoodwas, however, also an important inventor, who pioneered the use ofgold and platinum as glazes on lustre wares, and whose work onpyrometers earned him a fellowship in the Royal Society (1783).
Figure 31. Henry Maudslay’s slide and finishing lathe, dating from1800. Source: Maurice Daurnas, A History of Technology andInvention, Vol. III, Crown Publishers Inc., New York.
--- Page 29 ---
In the glass industry, too, Britain followed the Continent. In oraround 1688, French glassblowers adopted the cast-plate process,which produced flat glass (by far the most important output of theindustry) with a much more even and flat surface than the cheapermethod of* blown “crown” glass. The great royal manufacture at St.Gobain led in the production of window glass and mirrors using thissystem. Its adoption in Britain dates from only the 1770s, and eventhen it remained dependent on French know-how. On the other hand,the British pioneered glassmaking using a coal-fired reverberatoryfurnace. Through covered crucibles, the smoke was prevented fromdiscoloring the glass, it technique the French (lid not master until theRevolution (Scoville, 1950, p. 43). The most important breakthroughin the glass industry was made in 1798 by Pierre Louis Guinand, aSwiss, who invented the stirring process in which he stirred themolten glass in the crucible using a hollow cylinder of burnt fireclay,dispersing the air bubbles in the glass more evenly. The techniqueproduced optical glass of unprecedented quality. Guinand kept hisprocess secret, but his son sold the technique to it FrenchManufacturer in 1827, who in turn sold it to the Chance BrothersClass Company in Birmingham, which soon became one of’ thepremier glassmakers in Europe.
In the technology of papermaking, machinery producingcontinuous sheets had been patented in 1798 by the FrenchmanNicholas Louis Robert. Robert’s main idea was to produce the paperon an endless belt of woven wire, replacing the process thatproduced separate sheets made in molds used until then. Theprinciples developed in Robert’s machine were further developed bythe British engineer Bryan Donkin and eventually came to he knownas the Fourdrinier machine, after a London stationer who was thefirst to adopt the new machinery successfully (Coleman, 1958, pp.179-90; Clapham, 1957, p. 416). Although the paper industry is notoften thought of as a typical industry of the Industrial Revolution,the Foudrinier machine was in fact it revolutionary device. Itreduced the time involved in making it given piece of paper fromthree weeks to three minutes, and five workmen in it mill couldfurnish enough work to keep 3,000 workers busy. Chlorinebleaching, crucial to the development of the cotton industry, wasalso applied successfully to paper pulp from the 1790s on, thuspermitting the use of dyed and printed rags in the production ofpaper.
Britain, then, had no monopoly on invention, but when it wasbehind, it shamelessly borrowed, imitated, and stole other nations’
--- Page 30 ---
technological knowledge. Another good example of Britonsapplying new technology developed elsewhere was the chemicalindustry. Beithollet, the inventor of chlorine bleaching, was French,as was Nicholas Leblanc, who developed the soda making processnamed after him. Leblanc reacted salt and sulphuric acid to produceSodium sulphate, which after heating with lime or charcoal yieldedraw soda together with hydrochloric acid, it noxious by-product. TheLeblanc process became the basis of the modern chemical industryand is regarded as one of’ the most important inventions of thetime.’ In the adoption of’ soda, Britain was relatively slow, and onlyin the 1820s did it start to adopt Leblanc’s process on it large scale.The explanation usually given for this delay is the high tax on salt.,which made artificial soda more expensive than vegetable alkali.Once the salt tax was repealed, British soda production grew rapidlyand by the 1850s exceeded French output by a factor of three(Haber, 1958, pp. 10-14). In other areas of the chemical industry,however, Britain led the Continent from the middle of the eighteenthcentury. Sulphuric acid, known as vitriol, used in bleaching andmetallurgy, was obtained by adding saltpeter to sulphur in large glassvessels, a process invented in France in 1666. The French weretenable to make much use of this invention, and in about 1740 theprocess was adopted by Joshua Ward, an English pharmacist whoadopted the glasschamber process, and the price of sulphuric acidfell from almost £9 to 10 s. per pound. In 17.46, john Roebuckperfected his lead-chamber process for the production of sulphuricacid, and Britain remained the center of this industry. Only after themiddle of the nineteenth century did the Germans establish firmleadership in chemistry, thanks to their superior chemists.
--- Page 31 ---
Figure 32. Soda manufacture using Leblanc’s process: (i) shows thefurnace in which the reaction takes place; (ii) shows the big vats inwhich the soda was dissolved out; (iii) shows the preparation of sodafor the glass industry.
Source: (i) After C. Tomlinson. Do’ Useful Arts and Manufactwesof Grrat Britain, Part 11, Section: ”I-he Manufacture of Soda,” p. 33.London, 1848. E. Norman. (ii, iii) After C. Tomlinson. Ibid., p. 26.1). E. Woodall.
An interesting example of international collaboration intechnological progress was the development of gaslighting.Although this invention was probably modest in its contribution to
--- Page 32 ---
national income, it was important in its effect on the quality of life:gaslit streets were safer, gaslit homes promoted literacy, gaslittheatres made entertainment more sophisticated, and gaslit factoriesmade night work cheaper and more efficient. Prior to 1780, lightingtechnology had changed little since antiquity. Lamps burningrapeseed and similar oils provided a smoky light. Candles weremostly made of tallow and produced a smoky and malodorousflame. Wax candles were superior, but too expensive to be usedwidely.
Gaslighting was a joint German-Anglo-French project. The use ofgas as a source of light was first pointed out by the Belgian physicistJean Pierre Minkelers and the German pharmacist. G. Mickel in thelate I 780s. In 1799, the Frenchman Philippe Lebou combined awoodderived gas with the Argand burner, developed by theFrenchman Aitne Argand in the early 1780s.” In Lebon’s so-calledthermolamp, the gas and the air were introduced separately, and theheavier byproducts were collected in a special receptacle. In 1798,the Scotsman William Murdock, who worked for Boulton & Watt(which had bought Argand’s patent in Britain), lit his forge with gasderived from coal, which soon proved superior to gas oracle fromwood. By 1807, Manchester’s cotton mills and London’s Pall Mallwere illuminated by gas. ‘fhe Englishman Samuel Clegg showedhow gas could be distributed from it central production site toindividual consumers using hydraulic gas mains. His son-in-law,John Malam, developed in 1819 it metering system that couldmonitor the quantities used by each customer. Following the returnof peace in 1815, the idea spread rapidly through the Continent: thework of a German chemist appropriately named Wilhelm Lampadiusled to the illumination of Berlin streets in 1826. Further innovations,such as filtering the gas through quicklime to remove the noisomeodor caused by sulphurite hych’ogen, helped to reduce the price andimprove the quality of gaslighting.
In mining, the years of the Industrial Revolution were marked bygradual progress but few spectacular advances. Coal became ofovergrowing importance to the economy, in part because of its use inengines and metallurgy, and in part because a growing and moreprosperous population demanded it for home heating. Yet aside fromthe use of steam engines in pumping water from the mines, the onlyradical invention in coal mining was the safety lamp, invented byHumphrey Davy in 1815. Better ventilation, the introduction of railsin underground hauling, and the redesign of* shafts for increasedsafety were the main foci of progress in mining. By 1830
--- Page 33 ---
steamdriven fans came into use, further reducing the dangers of’explosion. The technical problems involved in using powermachinery inside it mine could not be solved, however. The increasein production here consisted primarily of a shift along the supplycurve, rather than an outward movement of the curve, as was thecase in textiles and metal. In other words, output in the miningsector increased primarily because more resources were allocated toit, not because new techniques allowed existing resources to producecheaper or better.
Finally, one of the greatest macroinventions of all times occurredduring the heyday of the Industrial Revolution, yet it is rarelymentioned in connection with it. The invention of ballooning by theMontgolfier brothers in France in 1783 is surely an epochalinvention in terms of novelty and originality. Since time immemorialpeople had dreamed of human flight, but, some ill-fated attemptsaside, it had never been achieved. Attempts to fly typically sought toimitate birds, equipping the flyer with wings and a tail, but withoutthe faintest understanding of’ the principles of’ aeronautics. Josephde Montgolfier was the first to take an entirely different tack, thatproved amazingly successful. Montgolfier was aware of’ HenryCavendish’s discovery in 1766 of’ hydrogen, it gas lighter than air.He believed that fire gave off a similar gas, and that when the gaswas captured in a closed vessel, that vessel would be lighter than airand thus rise. The reasoning was thus partly fallacious. What madethe Montgolfier balloon rise was not a gas lighter than air but airitself, which, heated, expanded and thus reduced its specific weight.Success was immediate. Half a year after the emergence of the idea,the famous demonstration in Annonay took place. On November 21,1783, the first two human beings lifted off, traveling through the airand living to tell about it. Except for it few military applications,ballooning was, of’ course, of limited direct economic effect. Butthere can be little doubt that the consequences of’ the invention ofballooning were far-reaching. Few inventions were more powerful inaccustoming people to the idea of technological progress andalerting them to the ability of human ingenuity and creativity tocontrol the forces of nature and do things never clone before.
The technological developments in the British manufacturingsector increased output by hitherto unimagined factors. The price ofcotton cloth declined by 85 percent between 1780 and 1850. Aselementary economic analysis shows, in a competitive economytechnological progress in existing goods is usually transmitted toconsumers through lower prices. The role of demand in the process
--- Page 34 ---
was largely passive, as consumers responded to lower prices bybuying more or, in the terms of economics, slid down their demandcurves.” Technological progress created both totally new goods andhigher-quality old goods. The shift in supply thus either satisfied analready existing demand or created new needs previously notexplicitly felt. Either way, it makes little sense to try to explain thetiming or the location of the Industrial Revolution by exogenouschanges in consumer demand for goods and services.
Why did these breakthroughs not occur earlier? Although theinnovations that made the Industrial Revolution typically did notdepend on new scientific knowledge, the fact remains that thetechnical problems that the engineers of the Industrial Revolutionsolved in metallurgy, power technology, and textiles were difficult.Given the tools, materials, and resources at the disposal of the mosttalented men in Europe, it is not surprising that it took it long time totackle many of the challenges. Those who claim with Hobsbawnt(1968, p. 38) that there was nothing inherent in the new technologyof the Industrial Revolution that could not have developed 150 yearsearlier confuse scientific knowledge with technological ability. Easyas they may seem to its today, the problems were often simply hard.Even when all that was required was to combine previously knownpieces of’ technical know-how into it new gadget that wouldactually work, the effort required by the inventor was oftenconsiderable. The “invention” and “development” stages oftechnological progress were not yet distinct. In recent years there hasbeen it tendency to downgrade the role of key persons in economichistory, and to tell the tale of’ the Industrial Revolution in terms ofinexorable social forces. This approach was largely it reaction to theearlier simpleminded heroic tales of invention, in which it handful ofbrilliant individuals were credited with all technological progress.But it is possible to go too far in the other direction. The changes inthe British economy during the Industrial Revolution were no doubtthe result of profound economic, social, and demographic forces.But inge nious, practical, mechanically minded people came up withthe ideas that changed the world. Ideas by themselves were not goodenough, as a long line of frustrated inventors found out. Dexterityand perseverance were equally important. Samuel Crompton, theyeomaninventor, wrote that he spent “four-and-a-half years at leastwherein every moment of time and power of mind as well asexpense which my other employment would permit were devoted tothis one end” (cited by Baines, 1835, p. 199). Watt first conceived ofhis separate condenser in 1765; the first commercially successfulmachine began to operate only in 1776. The invention of the self-
--- Page 35 ---
actor by Roberts involved a concentrated research effort (stimulatedby the spinners’ strike of 1824) that cost ,£12,000 and six years ofhard work to complete. In addition to everything else, inventionrequired people of unusual ability, such as Watt, Smeaton,Trevithick, and Roberts, as well as people of unusual energy, daring,and luck, such as Arkwright and Boulton. The supply of talent issurely not completely exogenous; it responds to incentives andattitudes. The question that must be confronted is why in somesocieties talent is unleashed upon technical problems that eventuallychange the entire productive economy, whereas in others this kind oftalent is either repressed or directed elsewhere.
The story of the Industrial Revolution is, of course, far more thanthe tale of ‘a handful of major inventors. The names mentionedabove are but a small fraction of those who contributed to the newtechnology. Right below the “superstars” were hundreds andthousands of engineers, technicians, entrepreneurs, foremen, andgifted amateurs who made less spectacular contributions totechnological progress. By adapting, modifying, improving,debugging, and extending earlier inventions, they wereindispensable to the success of the uncoordinated, unconsciouslyjoint project called the Industrial Revolution. In addition, we shouldnot forget that there were even more numerous and more anonymoustinkerers and inventors who made things that did not work, or whowere scooped by earlier or luckier competitors.
 