
--- Page 1 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
2. 
AN OVERVIEW 
We must step into history at some moment of time and in the process 
do violence to its essential continuity. We choose the tenth century­
following the decay of the Carolingian Empire, when feudalism and 
manorialism shaped the society of much of Western Europe, Since 
the key to our story is the evolution of institutional arrangements it 
is worthwhile to describe feudalism as precisely but as accurately as 
possible by way of the following exposition from the Shorter Cambridge 
Medieval History, pp. 418-19. 
Although full-grown feudalism was largely the result of the breakdown of 
older government and law, it both inherited law from the past and created 
it by a rapid growth of custom based on present fact . In one sense it may 
be defined as an arrangement of society based on contract, expressed or 
impli ed. The status of a person depended in every way on his position on 
the land, and on the other hand land-tenure determined political rights and 
duties. The acts constituting the feudal contract were called homage and in­
vestiture. The tenant or vassal knelt before the lord surrounded by his court 
(curia), placing his folded hands between those of the lord , and thus became 
his 'man' (homme, whence the word homa ge). He also took an oath of fealt y 
(fidelitas) of special obligation . This of course was the ancient ceremony of 
--- Page 2 ---
2 
 
 
 
commendation developed and specialized. The lord in his turn responded by 
'investiture', handing to his vassal a banner, a staff, a clod of earth, a charter, 
or other symbol of the property or office conceded , the.fief (feodum or Lehn) 
as it was termed, while the older word benefice went gradually out of use. 
This was the free and honourable tenure characterized by military service , 
but the peasant, whether free or serf, equally swore a form of fealty and was 
invested with the tenement he held of his lord. The feudal nexus thus cre­
ated essentially involved reciprocity. 
Economic activity, however, centered around the manor, and again 
the Shorter Cambridge Medieval History provides for the complexity of 
this institution a concise description , pp. 424-5. 
The most characteristic version of the manorial village, although narrowest 
in its distribution, was the English 'manor', which became the most closely 
organized and most durable of the type. It consisted of two once dist inct 
elements, the economic and the administrative , and thus strove towards two 
intimately connected aims, the subsistence of the villagers, and the lord's 
profit and authority . The village community lay at the basis of the whole. In 
a brief description only an average account , subject to countless irregulari­
ties, can be given. The normal villager (villanus villein) would hold ayardland 
or virgate of thirty acres (or its half, a bovate), distributed in scattered acre­
strips in the three or two open fields of the manor, which might coincide with 
the village or be only a part of it. He followed the manor routine (its 'custom') 
in the cultivation, the ploughing , sowing, and reaping , of his strips ; 
independent husbandry was barely possible in the open fields. In each year 
one field in rotation out of the two or three (as the case might be) was left 
fallow and unenclosed for beasts to graze in; the cultivated field or fields were 
fenc ed round. His own livestock up to a stated number were free to pasture in 
the 'waste'; he had his share of the hay-meadow. Intermingled with the 
--- Page 3 ---
3 
 
 
tenants' strips in the open fields lay the strips kept by the lord of the manor 
in his own hands, his demesne. There was a strong tendency, however, to 
isolate the demesne in a home-farm. In this connexion arose the greater part 
of the labour services which the villager owed for his tenement. Each villein 
household owed week-work (one labourer) of usually three days a week on the 
demesne farm, which included its share of the ploughs, oxen, and imple­
ments for all kinds of work and cartage . The cottars, whose holdings were 
much smaller, owed of course less labour . At the peak periods of mowing and 
reaping, boon-work of all kinds was required in addition, and in this the 
freemen, socagers and others, who occupied their tenements f'6r a rent or 
other terms implying free contract, took their part. A freeman, however, 
might hold land on villein tenure, and vice versa. The assarts, or reclamations 
from the waste, were commonly less burdened with the heavy dues of 
villeinage. Dues of all kinds , indeed, pressed on both villein and freeman of 
the manor, render of hens, eggs, special payments , etc. The villein, besides 
being tied to the soil, was subject to the servile fine of merchet (form ariage) on 
his daughter's marriage and to the exaction of his best beast as heriot (main­
morte) on his death; he paid the money levy of tallage at the lord's will; his 
corn was ground in the lord's mill ; in France the lord 's oven and his winepress 
were seigneurial monopolies . The villein might be selected as reeve or other 
petty official of rural manorial economy. His condition, however, was miti­
gated by the growth of the custom of the manor, which at any rate fixed the 
exactions he laboured under and secured him in his hereditary holding. Like 
the freeman he attended the manorial court, which declared the custom of 
the manor and its working . The lord of many manors would send round 
steward or bailiff to receive his profits and collect produce for his support in 
those in which he periodically resided . Besides the subsistence of the vil­
lagers, in short, their labour was to provide that of the warrior governing 
class and the allied ecclesiastical dignitaries, to both of whom they owed as a 
rule what little peace, justi ce, and enlightenment they had. 
--- Page 4 ---
4 
 
 
Thus the customs of the manor became the unwritten 'constitution', 
or the fundamental institutional arrangement of an essentially 
anarchic world, most properly viewed as small isolated settlements, 
frequently in the lee of a fortified place and surrounded by wilderness. 
The wooden or earth castle, the knight, and the relatively self-suffi­
cient manor had emerged as the most viable response to the collapse 
of order and the recurrent invasions of Norsemen, Moslems, and Mag­
yars. While the terror of foreign marauders had declined by the middle 
of the tenth century, the land seethed with continual warfare and 
brigandage, as the power oflocal lords waxed and waned. Feudalism 
provided a measure of stability and order in this fragmented world. 
Where security prevailed, population began once more to increase. If 
growing numbers threatened to crowd a manor uncomfortably, there 
was always new land to be cleared and cultivated within the protection 
of a new lord. Spreading out north and west over Europe, the waves of 
migrants gradually engulfed the wilderness, leaving less space for brig­
ands to hide and bringing more and more area under the protection 
oflords and their vassals. True, they fought amongst themselves; but 
gradually, very gradually, the chaos gave way, the strife declined. 
Commerce between different parts of Europe had always been 
potentially of mutual benefit, since the variety of resources and cli­
matic conditions induced differentiation of crops and livestock. But 
trade had been sporadic because so many dangers within the wilder­
ness beset the traveling merchant. As peace and security now revived, 
so did the profitability of exchanging varied products. In response, 
towns were taking form in the more densely settled areas either under 
the protection of a lord or as independent entities with their own walls, 
--- Page 5 ---
5 
 
 
government, and military defense. Here skills and crafts flourished, 
providing 'manufactured' goods to trade for the needed food and raw 
materials from the countryside. 
Such a shift away from self-sufficiency toward more specialization 
54 Highhgtiter? - - - - - - - - - • - - - - • - - - - - - - - - - - - • - - • - - - - - - - - - • • - • - - - - - - - - - - - - • - • • - • - - - - - • - - - - - - - - • - - - - - - - - - - - - - • - - - - - - • - - - - • 
and increasing trade undermined the efficiency of the old feudal and 
manorial relationship . Where the great lords had once been happy to 
claim the defensive services of a number of knights for forty days a 
year from their vassals , they now chose to receive a money payment 
(scutage) which enabled them to hire mercenary troops as needed . 
The vassal too could specialize with more efficiency when freed of the 
stringent requirement of armed labor services. On the manor, both 
lord and serf gained flexibility in consumption and transactions when 
a money payment (commutation) replaced labor services. 
The revival of trade and commerce in the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries led not only to the proliferation of towns but to a host of in­
stitutional arrangements designed to reduce market imperfections. As 
new towns developed their own governments for administration and 
protection, they necessarily evolved bodies oflaw to adjudicate dis­
putes arising from these new conditions. The towns of northern Italy, 
central Germany, and Flanders became thriving centers of commerce, 
as population and trade continued to grow. 
But by the thirteenth century a change was becoming evident. 
The best land had all been taken up, and new settlement now had to 
rely on poorer quality land or work the existing cultivated land more 
intensively. A young laborer could no longer produce as much as did 
his forebears because he could not command as much land. Prices for 
those goods which it required a great deal ofland to produce - agricul-
--- Page 6 ---
6 
 
 
tural products - rose relative to other goods. In contrast, since labor 
had grown relatively more abundant, labor-intensive goods fell in price 
relative to land-intensive goods. The customary feudal and manorial 
contractual arrangements, already altered by trade and by the growth 
of a money economy, now met further incentive for change. Since land 
had become much more valuable, both lord and peasant had reason to 
seek more exclusive use ofland and to place more restrictions on its 
use by others. Similarly, because he now produced relatively less, the 
earnings of the peasant laborer declined. The customs of the manor 
limited the changes that could be made, but these new conditions did 
lead to efforts to modify existing contractual arrangements to permit 
more exclusive use ofland. The new economic conditions gave the lord 
greater 'bargaining' strength in negotiating new contractual arrange­
ments with the serf. The effect of a relative increase in the quantity of 
labor, predictably, was a fall in the living standard of the worker. Food 
became more expensive. Real earnings declined . 
While the thirteenth century witnessed an inexorable decline in the 
standard oflife of the peasant, it unfolded a pageant of expansion in 
trade and commerce. Led by Venice, Italian cities stretched their trade 
routes throughout the Mediterranean and reached ever farther along 
the Atlantic Coast, even to Britain. The Champagne Fair in France , the 
Flemish wool trade, and the German mining and commercial centers 
all participated in a growing commerce which induced improvements 
in banking and commercial institutional arrangements. 
Throughout the century, because of diminishing returns to labor 
in agriculture, population growth continued to outstrip the growth 
in output. The first evident consequence was the widespread famine 
--- Page 7 ---
7 
 
 
of 1315-1 7. But far more deadly and persistent was the plague, both 
bubonic and pneumonic, which spread over Europe between 134 7 and 
13 51. Thereafter, the pestilence became endemic, and successive epi­
demics continued to decimate towns and countryside. 
No accurate figures cite the extent of the population decline, but it 
appears to have continued for a century. The result was a reversal in 
relative product and factor values. Once again land had become rel­
atively abundant and labor scarcer and more valuable. The marginal 
lands everywhere went out of production, and some land was shifted 
away from crops to the raising of livestock which requires larger ex­
panses of land. Real wages rose everywhere in spite of political efforts 
to curb them. For the first time, rudimentary statistics begin to emerge 
to show the economic conditions that prevailed. 1 Based on them, Fig. 
2.1 pictures the period's relative decline in agricultural prices, the rise 
in wages, and the consequent rise in real wages. 
Falling rents made the landlord worse off at the same time that 
the scarcity of labor improved the bargaining strength of the worker. 
Under this influence the master-servant aspect of manorialism gradu­
ally fell away. Leases were lengthened, and the villein began to acquire 
exclusive rights to his land. Only where the lords could effectively 
collude rather than compete for labor, as in Eastern Europe, could they 
thwart the changing status (and income) of their former vassals. 
While the bonds of manorialism were dissolving in the countryside, 
the same force of declining population was adversely affecting trade 
and commerce. Contracting markets lessened the incentive to reduce 
market imperfections. With the exception of Italian banking, where 
the great Medici bank in Florence was flourishing, the institutional 
--- Page 8 ---
8 
 
 
 
arrangements now being devised were more 'defensive' in nature, de­
signed chiefly to maintain existing markets, to monopolize trade, and 
to prevent entry (and competition). The Hanseatic League, a group of 
trading cities, appears to have been such a defensive arrangement on 
an international level, and the rise of craft guilds in towns reflected the 
same trend locally. 
By the time that population again began to grow in the last half of 
the fifteenth century, the basic structure of a feudal society had given 
way. Its erosion was to be completed by the next cycle of population 
expansion and Malthusian pressure on resources. Figs. 2.2 and 2.3 
show the contours of rising agricultural prices and falling real wages 
in the sixteenth century which in these respects replicated the thir­
teenth. But crucial differences now appeared. Improvements in ships 
and navigation led to explorations which culminated in discoveries 
and settlements in the New World. The evolving structure of property 
rights (particularly in Holland and England) became a fundamental 
framework within which productive institutional arrangements took 
form. As a result, the Malthusian reaction in the seventeenth century 
was far less catastrophic than in the fourteenth, since both immigra­
tion to the New World and productivity increases were mitigating the 
diminishing returns in agriculture. 
--- Page 9 ---
9 
 
 
 
 
3so 
300 
I SO 
100 
- wages (ogricu!Nnl) 
------- real waieo (oencuJtural) 
•• ••••••• wheat 
8 
"' i 
~ 
Fig. 2.1. The wages oflabor and the price of wheat in England: 1200-1500. 
Sources: wheat, J. E. Thorold Rogers, A History of Agriculture and Prices in 
England: 1261-1400, vol. 1 (1400-1500), p. 245, vol. 4, p. 292; wages, Lord Bev­
eridge, 'Westminster Wages in the Manorial Era', The Economic History Review, 
8, no. 1 (August 19 5 5). Note: missing observations were filled by interpolation. 
--- Page 10 ---
10 
 
 
6 
4 
3 
l 
•••• •••• • rcott 
- qriculrural prices 
- general price level 
- - ---- - industrial prices 
• - • - money wagn 
. . . . . . . . . 
···•••••• . 
. . 
. / 
.. . •· .. 
.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . 
Fig. 2.2. Indices of rents, agricultural prices, the general price level, industrial 
prices and money wages for England: 1500-1600. 
Sources: Joan Thirsk, The Agrarian History of England and Wales, vol. 4, 
1500-1640 (Cambridge Universit y Press, 196 71, pp. 862,865 ; Eric Kerridge, 
'The Movement of Rent, 1540-1640', The Economic History Review, 2nd series, 6 
(August 1953), 25. 
--- Page 11 ---
11 
 
 
8 
6 
• • • , • • • • • • terms of trade 
--- real wages 
-······· relative factor prices 
Fig. 2.3. Index of real wages, the terms of trade and relative factor prices for 
England: 1500-1600. 
Sources: E. H. Phelps-Brown and Sheila V. Hopkins, 'Wage-Rates and Prices: 
Evidence for Population Pressure in the Sixteenth Century', Economica 24, no. 
96, p. 306; and 'Seven Centuries of the Prices of Consumables, Compared with 
Builders' Wage-Rates', Economica 23, no. 92, pp. 311-14 . 
But we have gone ahead of our story. Rising agricultural prices and 
the consequent more rapid rise in rents had led to renewed efforts to 
eliminate the vestiges of common ownership ofland. England inau­
gurated an era of enclosures supported by basic statutes providing for 
easier transfer of property and protection of the peasant. 
--- Page 12 ---
12 
 
 
 
The sixteenth century was equally an age of commercial expansion. 
Trade was encouraged by the growing differentiation in factor endow­
ments, since the lands of Eastern Europe were still abundant relative 
to population , whereas the burgeoning towns and cities of Western 
Europe had become centers of skilled trades and manufactures . Trea­
sure from the New World, pouring in a silver flood through such cities 
as Lisbon , Cadiz, Bordeaux, Rouen, Antwerp, Amsterdam, Bristol and 
London, additionally nourished this growing international market. 
The consequence was the innovation and proliferation of a host of ar­
rangements such as joint stock companies and institutions designed to 
reduce market imperfection by coping with problems of :financing and 
risk. Another logical step then followed: a body oflaws developed to 
provide more efficient property rights in the ownership and exchange 
of intangible assets . 
To a modern reader this progression may sound inevitably simple . It 
was far from that . And in light of the previous chapter, one should be 
already prepared for the widely divergent experiments and false starts 
that in fact emerged during this period in different regions. 
Basic to all other changes was the form of the evolving nation-state 
induced by the expanding market economy. In the fragmented world 
of feudal society , the fixed castle and the knight in armor had been 
the chessmen in the game of defense. As these gave way before new 
military technology (the crossbow , longbow, pike and gunpowder) the 
optimal size of the most efficient military unit gradually increased . The 
manor had to grow for efficiency into a community, a state; and, to sur­
vive, the state had to achieve far greater fiscal revenues than could be 
obtained from traditional feudal sources. Trade had to be encouraged, 
--- Page 13 ---
13 
 
 
increased, extended , to bring in tax revenues to the head of state . And 
whereas the feudal castle had been unable to provide sufficient protec­
tion for longdistance trade, the larger political units or coalitions that 
emerged now were capable of sheltering more effectively the routes 
needed for the growth of commerce. 
An increase in such trade became the overriding concern of every 
sovereign in Europe. Intrigues, coalition, betrayal , confiscations, 
treaties, ingenious and ingenuous tax impositions, all entered the 
patchwork of endeavors which transformed feudal society ultimately 
into the nation-states. And the sort of state that emerged was de­
termined by the strength a monarch could exert in claiming the mo­
nopoly powers of government, which in turn left an imprint on the 
structure of the developing economy . 
In France and Spain the monarchy gradually wrested power away 
from representative bodies and developed a system (and level) of taxa­
tion which promoted local and regional monopoly, stifled innovation 
and factor mobility, and led to a decline in productive economic ac­
tivity which was relative in the case of France and absolute in the case 
of Spain .2. In Holland, the changing conditions led to an oligarchy of 
merchants; in England, after years of strife, to the ascendancy of par­
liament over the Crown. And in both, to sustained economic growth, 
resulting from a hospitable environment for the evolution of a body of 
property rights which promoted institutional arrangements , leading 
to fee-simple absolute ownership in land , free labor, the protection 
of privately owned goods, patent laws and other encouragements to 
ownership of intellectual property, and a host of institutional arrange­
ments to reduce market imperfections in product and capital markets. 
--- Page 14 ---
14 
 
 
Our story ends with the beginning of the eighteenth century. By 
then the essential conditions had been created for bringing the private 
rate of return close enough to the social rate, so that productivity in­
crease was built into the system in Holland and England (as well as in 
the New World). Over the next century these conditions in these areas 
induced a revolution in technology which gradually spread over much 
of the rest of Europe and satellite colonies overseas as well. 
1 We would caution the reader that not only are the quantitative data sparse 
and of uneven quality but usually they relate to a narrow geographic area. We 
have used the data primarily as illustrative of broad trends over larger geo­
graphic units when ~Te feel confident that such quantitative information does 
in fact mirror more general tendencies . 
.2. Because the price series varied between nations during the seventeenth 
century, we postpone our discussion of them to Chapter 9 below. 